Things are said to be named 'equivocally' when, though they have a
common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for
each. Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture can both lay claim to
the name 'animal'; yet these are equivocally so named, for, though they
have a common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs
for each. For should any one define in what sense each is an animal,
his definition in the one case will be appropriate to that case only.

On the other hand, things are said to be named 'univocally' which have
both the name and the definition answering to the name in common. A man
and an ox are both 'animal', and these are univocally so named,
inasmuch as not only the name, but also the definition, is the same in
both cases: for if a man should state in what sense each is an animal,
the statement in the one case would be identical with that in the other.

Things are said to be named 'derivatively', which derive their name
from some other name, but differ from it in termination. Thus the
grammarian derives his name from the word 'grammar', and the courageous
man from the word 'courage'.



Part 2

Forms of speech are either simple or composite. Examples of the latter
are such expressions as 'the man runs', 'the man wins'; of the former
'man', 'ox', 'runs', 'wins'.

Of things themselves some are predicable of a subject, and are never
present in a subject. Thus 'man' is predicable of the individual man,
and is never present in a subject.

By being 'present in a subject' I do not mean present as parts are
present in a whole, but being incapable of existence apart from the
said subject.

Some things, again, are present in a subject, but are never predicable
of a subject. For instance, a certain point of grammatical knowledge is
present in the mind, but is not predicable of any subject; or again, a
certain whiteness may be present in the body (for colour requires a
material basis), yet it is never predicable of anything.

Other things, again, are both predicable of a subject and present in a
subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the human mind, it is
predicable of grammar.

There is, lastly, a class of things which are neither present in a
subject nor predicable of a subject, such as the individual man or the
individual horse. But, to speak more generally, that which is
individual and has the character of a unit is never predicable of a
subject. Yet in some cases there is nothing to prevent such being
present in a subject. Thus a certain point of grammatical knowledge is
present in a subject.



Part 3

When one thing is predicated of another, all that which is predicable
of the predicate will be predicable also of the subject. Thus, 'man' is
predicated of the individual man; but 'animal' is predicated of 'man';
it will, therefore, be predicable of the individual man also: for the
individual man is both 'man' and 'animal'.

If genera are different and co-ordinate, their differentiae are
themselves different in kind. Take as an instance the genus 'animal'
and the genus 'knowledge'. 'With feet', 'two-footed', 'winged',
'aquatic', are differentiae of 'animal'; the species of knowledge are
not distinguished by the same differentiae. One species of knowledge
does not differ from another in being 'two-footed'.

But where one genus is subordinate to another, there is nothing to
prevent their having the same differentiae: for the greater class is
predicated of the lesser, so that all the differentiae of the predicate
will be differentiae also of the subject.



Part 4

Expressions which are in no way composite signify substance, quantity,
quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, or affection.
To sketch my meaning roughly, examples of substance are 'man' or 'the
horse', of quantity, such terms as 'two cubits long' or 'three cubits
long', of quality, such attributes as 'white', 'grammatical'. 'Double',
'half', 'greater', fall under the category of relation; 'in the
market place', 'in the Lyceum', under that of place; 'yesterday', 'last
year', under that of time. 'Lying', 'sitting', are terms indicating
position, 'shod', 'armed', state; 'to lance', 'to cauterize', action;
'to be lanced', 'to be cauterized', affection.

No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation; it is
by the combination of such terms that positive or negative statements
arise. For every assertion must, as is admitted, be either true or
false, whereas expressions which are not in any way composite such as
'man', 'white', 'runs', 'wins', cannot be either true or false.



Part 5

Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the
word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present in a
subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. But in a secondary
sense those things are called substances within which, as species, the
primary substances are included; also those which, as genera, include
the species. For instance, the individual man is included in the
species 'man', and the genus to which the species belongs is 'animal';
these, therefore--that is to say, the species 'man' and the genus
'animal,-are termed secondary substances.

It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the
definition of the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For
instance, 'man' is predicated of the individual man. Now in this case
the name of the species 'man' is applied to the individual, for we use
the term 'man' in describing the individual; and the definition of
'man' will also be predicated of the individual man, for the individual
man is both man and animal. Thus, both the name and the definition of
the species are predicable of the individual.

With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are present in a
subject, it is generally the case that neither their name nor their
definition is predicable of that in which they are present. Though,
however, the definition is never predicable, there is nothing in
certain cases to prevent the name being used. For instance, 'white'
being present in a body is predicated of that in which it is present,
for a body is called white: the definition, however, of the colour
'white' is never predicable of the body.

Everything except primary substances is either predicable of a primary
substance or present in a primary substance. This becomes evident by
reference to particular instances which occur. 'Animal' is predicated
of the species 'man', therefore of the individual man, for if there
were no individual man of whom it could be predicated, it could not be
predicated of the species 'man' at all. Again, colour is present in
body, therefore in individual bodies, for if there were no individual
body in which it was present, it could not be present in body at all.
Thus everything except primary substances is either predicated of
primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did not
exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist.

Of secondary substances, the species is more truly substance than the
genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. For if any one
should render an account of what a primary substance is, he would
render a more instructive account, and one more proper to the subject,
by stating the species than by stating the genus. Thus, he would give a
more instructive account of an individual man by stating that he was
man than by stating that he was animal, for the former description is
peculiar to the individual in a greater degree, while the latter is too
general. Again, the man who gives an account of the nature of an
individual tree will give a more instructive account by mentioning the
species 'tree' than by mentioning the genus 'plant'.

Moreover, primary substances are most properly called substances in
virtue of the fact that they are the entities which underlie everything
else, and that everything else is either predicated of them or present
in them. Now the same relation which subsists between primary substance
and everything else subsists also between the species and the genus:
for the species is to the genus as subject is to predicate, since the
genus is predicated of the species, whereas the species cannot be
predicated of the genus. Thus we have a second ground for asserting
that the species is more truly substance than the genus.

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera, no one
is more truly substance than another. We should not give a more
appropriate account of the individual man by stating the species to
which he belonged, than we should of an individual horse by adopting
the same method of definition. In the same way, of primary substances,
no one is more truly substance than another; an individual man is not
more truly substance than an individual ox.

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we exclude
primary substances, we concede to species and genera alone the name
'secondary substance', for these alone of all the predicates convey a
knowledge of primary substance. For it is by stating the species or the
genus that we appropriately define any individual man; and we shall
make our definition more exact by stating the former than by stating
the latter. All other things that we state, such as that he is white,
that he runs, and so on, are irrelevant to the definition. Thus it is
just that these alone, apart from primary substances, should be called
substances.

Further, primary substances are most properly so called, because they
underlie and are the subjects of everything else. Now the same relation
that subsists between primary substance and everything else subsists
also between the species and the genus to which the primary substance
belongs, on the one hand, and every attribute which is not included
within these, on the other. For these are the subjects of all such. If
we call an individual man 'skilled in grammar', the predicate is
applicable also to the species and to the genus to which he belongs.
This law holds good in all cases.

It is a common characteristic of all substance that it is never present
in a subject. For primary substance is neither present in a subject nor
predicated of a subject; while, with regard to secondary substances, it
is clear from the following arguments (apart from others) that they are
not present in a subject. For 'man' is predicated of the individual
man, but is not present in any subject: for manhood is not present in
the individual man. In the same way, 'animal' is also predicated of the
individual man, but is not present in him. Again, when a thing is
present in a subject, though the name may quite well be applied to that
in which it is present, the definition cannot be applied. Yet of
secondary substances, not only the name, but also the definition,
applies to the subject: we should use both the definition of the
species and that of the genus with reference to the individual man.
Thus substance cannot be present in a subject.

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case that
differentiae cannot be present in subjects. The characteristics
'terrestrial' and 'two-footed' are predicated of the species 'man', but
not present in it. For they are not in man. Moreover, the definition of
the differentia may be predicated of that of which the differentia
itself is predicated. For instance, if the characteristic 'terrestrial'
is predicated of the species 'man', the definition also of that
characteristic may be used to form the predicate of the species 'man':
for 'man' is terrestrial.

The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the
whole, as in a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we should
have to admit that such parts are not substances: for in explaining the
phrase 'being present in a subject', we stated' that we meant
'otherwise than as parts in a whole'.

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all
propositions of which they form the predicate, they are predicated
univocally. For all such propositions have for their subject either the
individual or the species. It is true that, inasmuch as primary
substance is not predicable of anything, it can never form the
predicate of any proposition. But of secondary substances, the species
is predicated of the individual, the genus both of the species and of
the individual. Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the
species and of the individuals. Moreover, the definition of the species
and that of the genus are applicable to the primary substance, and that
of the genus to the species. For all that is predicated of the
predicate will be predicated also of the subject. Similarly, the
definition of the differentiae will be applicable to the species and to
the individuals. But it was stated above that the word 'univocal' was
applied to those things which had both name and definition in common.
It is, therefore, established that in every proposition, of which
either substance or a differentia forms the predicate, these are
predicated univocally.

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the case
of primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing is a
unit. In the case of secondary substances, when we speak, for instance,
of 'man' or 'animal', our form of speech gives the impression that we
are here also indicating that which is individual, but the impression
is not strictly true; for a secondary substance is not an individual,
but a class with a certain qualification; for it is not one and single
as a primary substance is; the words 'man', 'animal', are predicable of
more than one subject.

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the term
'white'; 'white' indicates quality and nothing further, but species and
genus determine the quality with reference to a substance: they signify
substance qualitatively differentiated. The determinate qualification
covers a larger field in the case of the genus that in that of the
species: he who uses the word 'animal' is herein using a word of wider
extension than he who uses the word 'man'.

Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What could be the
contrary of any primary substance, such as the individual man or
animal? It has none. Nor can the species or the genus have a contrary.
Yet this characteristic is not peculiar to substance, but is true of
many other things, such as quantity. There is nothing that forms the
contrary of 'two cubits long' or of 'three cubits long', or of 'ten',
or of any such term. A man may contend that 'much' is the contrary of
'little', or 'great' of 'small', but of definite quantitative terms no
contrary exists.

Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of degree. I do
not mean by this that one substance cannot be more or less truly
substance than another, for it has already been stated that this is
the case; but that no single substance admits of varying degrees within
itself. For instance, one particular substance, 'man', cannot be more
or less man either than himself at some other time or than some other
man. One man cannot be more man than another, as that which is white
may be more or less white than some other white object, or as that
which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than some other
beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist in a
thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, being white, is
said to be whiter at one time than it was before, or, being warm, is
said to be warmer or less warm than at some other time. But substance
is not said to be more or less that which it is: a man is not more
truly a man at one time than he was before, nor is anything, if it is
substance, more or less what it is. Substance, then, does not admit of
variation of degree.

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, while
remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting
contrary qualities. From among things other than substance, we should
find ourselves unable to bring forward any which possessed this mark.
Thus, one and the same colour cannot be white and black. Nor can the
same one action be good and bad: this law holds good with everything
that is not substance. But one and the selfsame substance, while
retaining its identity, is yet capable of admitting contrary qualities.
The same individual person is at one time white, at another black, at
one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another bad. This
capacity is found nowhere else, though it might be maintained that a
statement or opinion was an exception to the rule. The same statement,
it is agreed, can be both true and false. For if the statement 'he is
sitting' is true, yet, when the person in question has risen, the same
statement will be false. The same applies to opinions. For if any one
thinks truly that a person is sitting, yet, when that person has risen,
this same opinion, if still held, will be false. Yet although this
exception may be allowed, there is, nevertheless, a difference in the
manner in which the thing takes place. It is by themselves changing
that substances admit contrary qualities. It is thus that that which
was hot becomes cold, for it has entered into a different state.
Similarly that which was white becomes black, and that which was bad
good, by a process of change; and in the same way in all other cases it
is by changing that substances are capable of admitting contrary
qualities. But statements and opinions themselves remain unaltered in
all respects: it is by the alteration in the facts of the case that the
contrary quality comes to be theirs. The statement 'he is sitting'
remains unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another false,
according to circumstances. What has been said of statements applies
also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which the thing
takes place, it is the peculiar mark of substance that it should be
capable of admitting contrary qualities; for it is by itself changing
that it does so.

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that statements
and opinions are capable of admitting contrary qualities, his
contention is unsound. For statements and opinions are said to have
this capacity, not because they themselves undergo modification, but
because this modification occurs in the case of something else. The
truth or falsity of a statement depends on facts, and not on any power
on the part of the statement itself of admitting contrary qualities. In
short, there is nothing which can alter the nature of statements and
opinions. As, then, no change takes place in themselves, these cannot
be said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities.

But it is by reason of the modification which takes place within the
substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of admitting
contrary qualities; for a substance admits within itself either disease
or health, whiteness or blackness. It is in this sense that it is said
to be capable of admitting contrary qualities.

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while remaining
numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary
qualities, the modification taking place through a change in the
substance itself.

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance.



Part 6

Quantity is either discrete or continuous. Moreover, some quantities
are such that each part of the whole has a relative position to the
other parts: others have within them no such relation of part to part.

Instances of discrete quantities are number and speech; of continuous,
lines, surfaces, solids, and, besides these, time and place.

In the case of the parts of a number, there is no common boundary at
which they join. For example: two fives make ten, but the two fives
have no common boundary, but are separate; the parts three and seven
also do not join at any boundary. Nor, to generalize, would it ever be
possible in the case of number that there should be a common boundary
among the parts; they are always separate. Number, therefore, is a
discrete quantity.

The same is true of speech. That speech is a quantity is evident: for
it is measured in long and short syllables. I mean here that speech
which is vocal. Moreover, it is a discrete quantity for its parts have
no common boundary. There is no common boundary at which the syllables
join, but each is separate and distinct from the rest.

A line, on the other hand, is a continuous quantity, for it is possible
to find a common boundary at which its parts join. In the case of the
line, this common boundary is the point; in the case of the plane, it
is the line: for the parts of the plane have also a common boundary.
Similarly you can find a common boundary in the case of the parts of a
solid, namely either a line or a plane.

Space and time also belong to this class of quantities. Time, past,
present, and future, forms a continuous whole. Space, likewise, is a
continuous quantity; for the parts of a solid occupy a certain space,
and these have a common boundary; it follows that the parts of space
also, which are occupied by the parts of the solid, have the same
common boundary as the parts of the solid. Thus, not only time, but
space also, is a continuous quantity, for its parts have a common
boundary.

Quantities consist either of parts which bear a relative position each
to each, or of parts which do not. The parts of a line bear a relative
position to each other, for each lies somewhere, and it would be
possible to distinguish each, and to state the position of each on the
plane and to explain to what sort of part among the rest each was
contiguous. Similarly the parts of a plane have position, for it could
similarly be stated what was the position of each and what sort of
parts were contiguous. The same is true with regard to the solid and to
space. But it would be impossible to show that the parts of a number had
a relative position each to each, or a particular position, or to state
what parts were contiguous. Nor could this be done in the case of time,
for none of the parts of time has an abiding existence, and that which
does not abide can hardly have position. It would be better to say that
such parts had a relative order, in virtue of one being prior to
another. Similarly with number: in counting, 'one' is prior to 'two',
and 'two' to 'three', and thus the parts of number may be said to
possess a relative order, though it would be impossible to discover any
distinct position for each. This holds good also in the case of speech.
None of its parts has an abiding existence: when once a syllable is
pronounced, it is not possible to retain it, so that, naturally, as the
parts do not abide, they cannot have position. Thus, some quantities
consist of parts which have position, and some of those which have not.

Strictly speaking, only the things which I have mentioned belong to the
category of quantity: everything else that is called quantitative is a
quantity in a secondary sense. It is because we have in mind some one
of these quantities, properly so called, that we apply quantitative
terms to other things. We speak of what is white as large, because the
surface over which the white extends is large; we speak of an action or
a process as lengthy, because the time covered is long; these things
cannot in their own right claim the quantitative epithet. For instance,
should any one explain how long an action was, his statement would be
made in terms of the time taken, to the effect that it lasted a year,
or something of that sort. In the same way, he would explain the size
of a white object in terms of surface, for he would state the area
which it covered. Thus the things already mentioned, and these alone,
are in their intrinsic nature quantities; nothing else can claim the
name in its own right, but, if at all, only in a secondary sense.

Quantities have no contraries. In the case of definite quantities this
is obvious; thus, there is nothing that is the contrary of 'two cubits
long' or of 'three cubits long', or of a surface, or of any such
quantities. A man might, indeed, argue that 'much' was the contrary of
'little', and 'great' of 'small'. But these are not quantitative, but
relative; things are not great or small absolutely, they are so called
rather as the result of an act of comparison. For instance, a mountain
is called small, a grain large, in virtue of the fact that the latter
is greater than others of its kind, the former less. Thus there is a
reference here to an external standard, for if the terms 'great' and
'small' were used absolutely, a mountain would never be called small or
a grain large. Again, we say that there are many people in a village,
and few in Athens, although those in the city are many times as
numerous as those in the village: or we say that a house has many in
it, and a theatre few, though those in the theatre far outnumber those
in the house. The terms 'two cubits long', 'three cubits long', and so
on indicate quantity, the terms 'great' and 'small' indicate relation,
for they have reference to an external standard. It is, therefore,
plain that these are to be classed as relative.

Again, whether we define them as quantitative or not, they have no
contraries: for how can there be a contrary of an attribute which is
not to be apprehended in or by itself, but only by reference to
something external? Again, if 'great' and 'small' are contraries, it
will come about that the same subject can admit contrary qualities at
one and the same time, and that things will themselves be contrary to
themselves. For it happens at times that the same thing is both small
and great. For the same thing may be small in comparison with one
thing, and great in comparison with another, so that the same thing
comes to be both small and great at one and the same time, and is of
such a nature as to admit contrary qualities at one and the same
moment. Yet it was agreed, when substance was being discussed, that
nothing admits contrary qualities at one and the same moment. For
though substance is capable of admitting contrary qualities, yet no one
is at the same time both sick and healthy, nothing is at the same time
both white and black. Nor is there anything which is qualified in
contrary ways at one and the same time.

Moreover, if these were contraries, they would themselves be contrary
to themselves. For if 'great' is the contrary of 'small', and the same
thing is both great and small at the same time, then 'small' or 'great'
is the contrary of itself. But this is impossible. The term 'great',
therefore, is not the contrary of the term 'small', nor 'much' of
'little'. And even though a man should call these terms not relative
but quantitative, they would not have contraries.

It is in the case of space that quantity most plausibly appears to
admit of a contrary. For men define the term 'above' as the contrary of
'below', when it is the region at the centre they mean by 'below'; and
this is so, because nothing is farther from the extremities of the
universe than the region at the centre. Indeed, it seems that in
defining contraries of every kind men have recourse to a spatial
metaphor, for they say that those things are contraries which, within
the same class, are separated by the greatest possible distance.

Quantity does not, it appears, admit of variation of degree. One thing
cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than another. Similarly
with regard to number: what is 'three' is not more truly three than
what is 'five' is five; nor is one set of three more truly three than
another set. Again, one period of time is not said to be more truly
time than another. Nor is there any other kind of quantity, of all that
have been mentioned, with regard to which variation of degree can be
predicated. The category of quantity, therefore, does not admit of
variation of degree.

The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and inequality
are predicated of it. Each of the aforesaid quantities is said to be
equal or unequal. For instance, one solid is said to be equal or
unequal to another; number, too, and time can have these terms applied
to them, indeed can all those kinds of quantity that have been
mentioned.

That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, be termed
equal or unequal to anything else. One particular disposition or one
particular quality, such as whiteness, is by no means compared with
another in terms of equality and inequality but rather in terms of
similarity. Thus it is the distinctive mark of quantity that it can be
called equal and unequal.



Section 2


Part 7

Those things are called relative, which, being either said to be of
something else or related to something else, are explained by reference
to that other thing. For instance, the word 'superior' is explained by
reference to something else, for it is superiority over something else
that is meant. Similarly, the expression 'double' has this external
reference, for it is the double of something else that is meant. So it
is with everything else of this kind. There are, moreover, other
relatives, e.g. habit, disposition, perception, knowledge, and
attitude. The significance of all these is explained by a reference to
something else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is a habit of
something, knowledge is knowledge of something, attitude is the
attitude of something. So it is with all other relatives that have been
mentioned. Those terms, then, are called relative, the nature of which
is explained by reference to something else, the preposition 'of' or
some other preposition being used to indicate the relation. Thus, one
mountain is called great in comparison with another; for the
mountain claims this attribute by comparison with something. Again,
that which is called similar must be similar to something else, and all
other such attributes have this external reference. It is to be noted
that lying and standing and sitting are particular attitudes, but
attitude is itself a relative term. To lie, to stand, to be seated, are
not themselves attitudes, but take their name from the aforesaid
attitudes.

It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus virtue has a
contrary, vice, these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a
contrary, ignorance. But this is not the mark of all relatives;
'double' and 'triple' have no contrary, nor indeed has any such term.

It also appears that relatives can admit of variation of degree. For
'like' and 'unlike', 'equal' and 'unequal', have the modifications
'more' and 'less' applied to them, and each of these is relative in
character: for the terms 'like' and 'unequal' bear a
reference to something external. Yet, again, it is not every relative
term that admits of variation of degree. No term such as 'double'
admits of this modification. All relatives have correlatives: by the
term 'slave' we mean the slave of a master, by the term 'master', the
master of a slave; by 'double', the double of its half; by 'half', the
half of its double; by 'greater', greater than that which is less; by
'less', less than that which is greater.

So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to express
the correlation differs in some instances. Thus, by knowledge we mean
knowledge of the knowable; by the knowable, that which is to be
apprehended by knowledge; by perception, perception of the perceptible;
by the perceptible, that which is apprehended by perception.

Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear to
exist. This comes about when a blunder is made, and that to which the
relative is related is not accurately stated. If a man states that a
wing is necessarily relative to a bird, the connexion between these two
will not be reciprocal, for it will not be possible to say that a bird
is a bird by reason of its wings. The reason is that the original
statement was inaccurate, for the wing is not said to be relative to
the bird qua bird, since many creatures besides birds have wings, but
qua winged creature. If, then, the statement is made accurate, the
connexion will be reciprocal, for we can speak of a wing, having
reference necessarily to a winged creature, and of a winged creature as
being such because of its wings.

Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words, if no word exists
by which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we define a
rudder as necessarily having reference to a boat, our definition will
not be appropriate, for the rudder does not have this reference to a
boat qua boat, as there are boats which have no rudders. Thus we cannot
use the terms reciprocally, for the word 'boat' cannot be said to find
its explanation in the word 'rudder'. As there is no existing word, our
definition would perhaps be more accurate if we coined some word like
'ruddered' as the correlative of 'rudder'. If we express ourselves thus
accurately, at any rate the terms are reciprocally connected, for the
'ruddered' thing is 'ruddered' in virtue of its rudder. So it is in all
other cases. A head will be more accurately defined as the correlative
of that which is 'headed', than as that of an animal, for the animal
does not have a head qua animal, since many animals have no head.

Thus we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a thing is
related, when a name does not exist, if, from that which has a name, we
derive a new name, and apply it to that with which the first is
reciprocally connected, as in the aforesaid instances, when we derived
the word 'winged' from 'wing' and from 'rudder'.

All relatives, then, if properly defined, have a correlative. I add
this condition because, if that to which they are related is stated as
haphazard and not accurately, the two are not found to be
interdependent. Let me state what I mean more clearly. Even in the case
of acknowledged correlatives, and where names exist for each, there
will be no interdependence if one of the two is denoted, not by that
name which expresses the correlative notion, but by one of irrelevant
significance. The term 'slave', if defined as related, not to a master,
but to a man, or a biped, or anything of that sort, is not reciprocally
connected with that in relation to which it is defined, for the
statement is not exact. Further, if one thing is said to be correlative
with another, and the terminology used is correct, then, though all
irrelevant attributes should be removed, and only that one attribute
left in virtue of which it was correctly stated to be correlative with
that other, the stated correlation will still exist. If the correlative
of 'the slave' is said to be 'the master', then, though all irrelevant
attributes of the said 'master', such as 'biped', 'receptive of
knowledge', 'human', should be removed, and the attribute 'master'
alone left, the stated correlation existing between him and the slave
will remain the same, for it is of a master that a slave is said to be
the slave. On the other hand, if, of two correlatives, one is not
correctly termed, then, when all other attributes are removed and that
alone is left in virtue of which it was stated to be correlative, the
stated correlation will be found to have disappeared.

For suppose the correlative of 'the slave' should be said to be 'the
man', or the correlative of 'the wing' is 'the bird'; if the attribute
'master' be withdrawn from 'the man', the correlation between 'the man'
and 'the slave' will cease to exist, for if the man is not a master,
the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if the attribute 'winged' be
withdrawn from 'the bird', 'the wing' will no longer be relative; for
if the so-called correlative is not winged, it follows that 'the wing'
has no correlative.

Thus it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly
designated; if there is a name existing, the statement will be easy; if
not, it is doubtless our duty to construct names. When the terminology
is thus correct, it is evident that all correlatives are interdependent.

Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. This is
for the most part true, as in the case of the double and the half. The
existence of the half necessitates the existence of that of which it is
a half. Similarly the existence of a master necessitates the existence
of a slave, and that of a slave implies that of a master; these are
merely instances of a general rule. Moreover, they cancel one another;
for if there is no double it follows that there is no half, and vice
versa; this rule also applies to all such correlatives. Yet it does not
appear to be true in all cases that correlatives come into existence
simultaneously. The object of knowledge would appear to exist before
knowledge itself, for it is usually the case that we acquire knowledge
of objects already existing; it would be difficult, if not impossible,
to find a branch of knowledge the beginning of the existence of which
was contemporaneous with that of its object.

Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, cancels at
the same time the knowledge which was its correlative, the converse of
this is not true. It is true that if the object of knowledge does not
exist there can be no knowledge: for there will no longer be anything
to know. Yet it is equally true that, if knowledge of a certain object
does not exist, the object may nevertheless quite well exist. Thus, in
the case of the squaring of the circle, if indeed that process is an
object of knowledge, though it itself exists as an object of knowledge,
yet the knowledge of it has not yet come into existence. Again, if all
animals ceased to exist, there would be no knowledge, but there might
yet be many objects of knowledge.

This is likewise the case with regard to perception: for the object of
perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception. If the
perceptible is annihilated, perception also will cease to exist; but
the annihilation of perception does not cancel the existence of the
perceptible. For perception implies a body perceived and a body in
which perception takes place. Now if that which is perceptible is
annihilated, it follows that the body is annihilated, for the body is a
perceptible thing; and if the body does not exist, it follows that
perception also ceases to exist. Thus the annihilation of the
perceptible involves that of perception.

But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the
perceptible. For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that
perception also is annihilated, but perceptibles such as body, heat,
sweetness, bitterness, and so on, will remain.

Again, perception is generated at the same time as the perceiving
subject, for it comes into existence at the same time as the animal.
But the perceptible surely exists before perception; for fire and water
and such elements, out of which the animal is itself composed, exist
before the animal is an animal at all, and before perception. Thus it
would seem that the perceptible exists before perception.

It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is relative,
as seems to be the case, or whether exception is to be made in the case
of certain secondary substances. With regard to primary substances, it
is quite true that there is no such possibility, for neither wholes nor
parts of primary substances are relative. The individual man or ox is
not defined with reference to something external. Similarly with the
parts: a particular hand or head is not defined as a particular hand or
head of a particular person, but as the hand or head of a particular
person. It is true also, for the most part at least, in the case of
secondary substances; the species 'man' and the species 'ox' are not
defined with reference to anything outside themselves. Wood, again, is
only relative in so far as it is some one's property, not in so far as
it is wood. It is plain, then, that in the cases mentioned substance is
not relative. But with regard to some secondary substances there is a
difference of opinion; thus, such terms as 'head' and 'hand' are
defined with reference to that of which the things indicated are a
part, and so it comes about that these appear to have a relative
character. Indeed, if our definition of that which is relative was
complete, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to prove that no
substance is relative. If, however, our definition was not complete, if
those things only are properly called relative in the case of which
relation to an external object is a necessary condition of existence,
perhaps some explanation of the dilemma may be found.

The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the fact
that a thing is explained with reference to something else does not
make it essentially relative.

From this it is plain that, if a man definitely apprehends a relative
thing, he will also definitely apprehend that to which it is relative.
Indeed this is self-evident: for if a man knows that some particular
thing is relative, assuming that we call that a relative in the case of
which relation to something is a necessary condition of existence, he
knows that also to which it is related. For if he does not know at all
that to which it is related, he will not know whether or not it is
relative. This is clear, moreover, in particular instances. If a man
knows definitely that such and such a thing is 'double', he will also
forthwith know definitely that of which it is the double. For if there
is nothing definite of which he knows it to be the double, he does not
know at all that it is double. Again, if he knows that a thing is more
beautiful, it follows necessarily that he will forthwith definitely
know that also than which it is more beautiful. He will not merely know
indefinitely that it is more beautiful than something which is less
beautiful, for this would be supposition, not knowledge. For if he does
not know definitely that than which it is more beautiful, he can no
longer claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful than
something else which is less beautiful: for it might be that nothing
was less beautiful. It is, therefore, evident that if a man apprehends
some relative thing definitely, he necessarily knows that also
definitely to which it is related.

Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it is
possible to know their essential character definitely, but it does not
necessarily follow that we should know that to which they are related.
It is not possible to know forthwith whose head or hand is meant. Thus
these are not relatives, and, this being the case, it would be true to
say that no substance is relative in character. It is perhaps a
difficult matter, in such cases, to make a positive statement without
more exhaustive examination, but to have raised questions with regard
to details is not without advantage.



Part 8

By 'quality' I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be such
and such.

Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality let
us call 'habit' or 'disposition'. Habit differs from disposition in
being more lasting and more firmly established. The various kinds of
knowledge and of virtue are habits, for knowledge, even when acquired
only in a moderate degree, is, it is agreed, abiding in its character
and difficult to displace, unless some great mental upheaval takes
place, through disease or any such cause. The virtues, also, such as
justice, self-restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged or
dismissed, so as to give place to vice.

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is easily
changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat, cold,
disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man is disposed in
one way or another with reference to these, but quickly changes,
becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of well. So it is with all
other dispositions also, unless through lapse of time a disposition has
itself become inveterate and almost impossible to dislodge: in which
case we should perhaps go so far as to call it a habit.

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which
are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for
those who are not retentive of knowledge, but volatile, are not said to
have such and such a 'habit' as regards knowledge, yet they are
disposed, we may say, either better or worse, towards knowledge. Thus
habit differs from disposition in this, that while the latter in
ephemeral, the former is permanent and difficult to alter.

Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are not
necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be said
also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but those
who are disposed in some specific way have not in all cases the
corresponding habit.

Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, we
call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact it
includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity.
Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue of his
disposition, but in virtue of his inborn capacity or incapacity to do
something with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons are called
good boxers or good runners, not in virtue of such and such a
disposition, but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish
something with ease. Men are called healthy in virtue of the inborn
capacity of easy resistance to those unhealthy influences that may
ordinarily arise; unhealthy, in virtue of the lack of this capacity.
Similarly with regard to softness and hardness. Hardness is predicated
of a thing because it has that capacity of resistance which enables it
to withstand disintegration; softness, again, is predicated of a thing
by reason of the lack of that capacity.

A third class within this category is that of affective qualities and
affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of this sort
of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat, moreover,
and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective qualities. It is
evident that these are qualities, for those things that possess them
are themselves said to be such and such by reason of their presence.
Honey is called sweet because it contains sweetness; the body is called
white because it contains whiteness; and so in all other cases.

The term 'affective quality' is not used as indicating that those
things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. Honey is
not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor is this
what is meant in any other instance. Similarly heat and cold are called
affective qualities, not because those things which admit them are
affected. What is meant is that these said qualities are capable of
producing an 'affection' in the way of perception. For sweetness has
the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat, that of touch; and so
it is with the rest of these qualities.

Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are not said
to be affective qualities in this sense, but because they themselves
are the results of an affection. It is plain that many changes of
colour take place because of affections. When a man is ashamed, he
blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes pale, and so on. So true is
this, that when a man is by nature liable to such affections, arising
from some concomitance of elements in his constitution, it is a
probable inference that he has the corresponding complexion of skin.
For the same disposition of bodily elements, which in the former
instance was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame,
might be a result of a man's natural temperament, so as to produce the
corresponding colouring also as a natural characteristic. All
conditions, therefore, of this kind, if caused by certain permanent and
lasting affections, are called affective qualities. For pallor and
duskiness of complexion are called qualities, inasmuch as we are said
to be such and such in virtue of them, not only if they originate in
natural constitution, but also if they come about through long disease
or sunburn, and are difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout
life. For in the same way we are said to be such and such because of
these.

Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may easily be
rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called, not qualities,
but affections: for we are not said to be such in virtue of them. The man
who blushes through shame is not said to be a constitutional blusher,
nor is the man who becomes pale through fear said to be
constitutionally pale. He is said rather to have been affected.

Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities. In like
manner there are affective qualities and affections of the soul. That
temper with which a man is born and which has its origin in certain
deep-seated affections is called a quality. I mean such conditions as
insanity, irascibility, and so on: for people are said to be mad or
irascible in virtue of these. Similarly those abnormal psychic states
which are not inborn, but arise from the concomitance of certain other
elements, and are difficult to remove, or altogether permanent, are
called qualities, for in virtue of them men are said to be such and
such.

Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered ineffective are
called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man is irritable when
vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered man, when in such
circumstances he loses his temper somewhat, but rather is said to be
affected. Such conditions are therefore termed, not qualities, but
affections.

The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to a
thing; and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any other
qualities of this type; each of these defines a thing as being such and
such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular a thing is said to have
a specific character, or again because it is straight or curved; in
fact a thing's shape in every case gives rise to a qualification of it.

Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be terms
indicating quality: yet these, it would appear, really belong to a
class different from that of quality. For it is rather a certain
relative position of the parts composing the thing thus qualified
which, it appears, is indicated by each of these terms. A thing is
dense, owing to the fact that its parts are closely combined with one
another; rare, because there are interstices between the parts; smooth,
because its parts lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because some parts
project beyond others.

There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most properly
so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated.

These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name from
them as derivatives, or are in some other way dependent on them, are
said to be qualified in some specific way. In most, indeed in almost
all cases, the name of that which is qualified is derived from that of
the quality. Thus the terms 'whiteness', 'grammar', 'justice', give us
the adjectives 'white', 'grammatical', 'just', and so on.

There are some cases, however, in which, as the quality under
consideration has no name, it is impossible that those possessed of it
should have a name that is derivative. For instance, the name given to
the runner or boxer, who is so called in virtue of an inborn capacity,
is not derived from that of any quality; for both those capacities have
no name assigned to them. In this, the inborn capacity is distinct from
the science, with reference to which men are called, e.g. boxers or
wrestlers. Such a science is classed as a disposition; it has a name,
and is called 'boxing' or 'wrestling' as the case may be, and the name
given to those disposed in this way is derived from that of the
science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the quality, that
which takes its character from the quality has a name that is not a
derivative. For instance, the upright man takes his character from the
possession of the quality of integrity, but the name given him is not
derived from the word 'integrity'. Yet this does not occur often.

We may therefore state that those things are said to be possessed of
some specific quality which have a name derived from that of the
aforesaid quality, or which are in some other way dependent on it.

One quality may be the contrary of another; thus justice is the
contrary of injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The things,
also, which are said to be such and such in virtue of these qualities,
may be contrary the one to the other; for that which is unjust is
contrary to that which is just, that which is white to that which is
black. This, however, is not always the case. Red, yellow, and such
colours, though qualities, have no contraries.

If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a
quality. This will be evident from particular instances, if we apply
the names used to denote the other categories; for instance, granted
that justice is the contrary of injustice and justice is a quality,
injustice will also be a quality: neither quantity, nor relation, nor
place, nor indeed any other category but that of quality, will be
applicable properly to injustice. So it is with all other contraries
falling under the category of quality.

Qualities admit of variation of degree. Whiteness is predicated of one
thing in a greater or less degree than of another. This is also the
case with reference to justice. Moreover, one and the same thing may
exhibit a quality in a greater degree than it did before: if a thing is
white, it may become whiter.

Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we
should say that justice admitted of variation of degree, difficulties
might ensue, and this is true with regard to all those qualities which
are dispositions. There are some, indeed, who dispute the possibility
of variation here. They maintain that justice and health cannot very
well admit of variation of degree themselves, but that people vary in
the degree in which they possess these qualities, and that this is the
case with grammatical learning and all those qualities which are
classed as dispositions. However that may be, it is an incontrovertible
fact that the things which in virtue of these qualities are said to be
what they are vary in the degree in which they possess them; for one
man is said to be better versed in grammar, or more healthy or just,
than another, and so on.

The qualities expressed by the terms 'triangular' and 'quadrangular' do
not appear to admit of variation of degree, nor indeed do any that have
to do with figure. For those things to which the definition of the
triangle or circle is applicable are all equally triangular or
circular. Those, on the other hand, to which the same definition is not
applicable, cannot be said to differ from one another in degree; the
square is no more a circle than the rectangle, for to neither is the
definition of the circle appropriate. In short, if the definition of
the term proposed is not applicable to both objects, they cannot be
compared. Thus it is not all qualities which admit of variation of
degree.

Whereas none of the characteristics I have mentioned are peculiar to
quality, the fact that likeness and unlikeness can be predicated with
reference to quality only, gives to that category its distinctive
feature. One thing is like another only with reference to that in
virtue of which it is such and such; thus this forms the peculiar mark
of quality.

We must not be disturbed because it may be argued that, though
proposing to discuss the category of quality, we have included in it
many relative terms. We did say that habits and dispositions were
relative. In practically all such cases the genus is relative, the
individual not. Thus knowledge, as a genus, is explained by reference
to something else, for we mean a knowledge of something. But particular
branches of knowledge are not thus explained. The knowledge of grammar
is not relative to anything external, nor is the knowledge of music,
but these, if relative at all, are relative only in virtue of their
genera; thus grammar is said be the knowledge of something, not the
grammar of something; similarly music is the knowledge of something,
not the music of something.

Thus individual branches of knowledge are not relative. And it is
because we possess these individual branches of knowledge that we are
said to be such and such. It is these that we actually possess: we are
called experts because we possess knowledge in some particular branch.
Those particular branches, therefore, of knowledge, in virtue of which
we are sometimes said to be such and such, are themselves qualities,
and are not relative. Further, if anything should happen to fall within
both the category of quality and that of relation, there would be
nothing extraordinary in classing it under both these heads.



Section 3


Part 9

Action and affection both admit of contraries and also of variation of
degree. Heating is the contrary of cooling, being heated of being
cooled, being glad of being vexed. Thus they admit of contraries. They
also admit of variation of degree: for it is possible to heat in a
greater or less degree; also to be heated in a greater or less degree.
Thus action and affection also admit of variation of degree. So much,
then, is stated with regard to these categories.

We spoke, moreover, of the category of position when we were dealing
with that of relation, and stated that such terms derived their names
from those of the corresponding attitudes.

As for the rest, time, place, state, since they are easily
intelligible, I say no more about them than was said at the beginning,
that in the category of state are included such states as 'shod',
'armed', in that of place 'in the Lyceum' and so on, as was explained
before.



Part 10

The proposed categories have, then, been adequately dealt with. We must
next explain the various senses in which the term 'opposite' is used.
Things are said to be opposed in four senses: (i) as correlatives to
one another, (ii) as contraries to one another, (iii) as privatives to
positives, (iv) as affirmatives to negatives.

Let me sketch my meaning in outline. An instance of the use of the word
'opposite' with reference to correlatives is afforded by the
expressions 'double' and 'half'; with reference to contraries by 'bad'
and 'good'. Opposites in the sense of 'privatives' and 'positives' are
'blindness' and 'sight'; in the sense of affirmatives and negatives, the
propositions 'he sits', 'he does not sit'.

(i) Pairs of opposites which fall under the category of relation are
explained by a reference of the one to the other, the reference being
indicated by the preposition 'of' or by some other preposition. Thus,
double is a relative term, for that which is double is explained as the
double of something. Knowledge, again, is the opposite of the thing
known, in the same sense; and the thing known also is explained by its
relation to its opposite, knowledge. For the thing known is explained
as that which is known by something, that is, by knowledge. Such
things, then, as are opposite the one to the other in the sense of
being correlatives are explained by a reference of the one to the other.

(ii) Pairs of opposites which are contraries are not in any way
interdependent, but are contrary the one to the other. The good is not
spoken of as the good of the bad, but as the contrary of the bad, nor
is white spoken of as the white of the black, but as the contrary of
the black. These two types of opposition are therefore distinct. Those
contraries which are such that the subjects in which they are naturally
present, or of which they are predicated, must necessarily contain
either the one or the other of them, have no intermediate, but those in
the case of which no such necessity obtains, always have an
intermediate. Thus disease and health are naturally present in the body
of an animal, and it is necessary that either the one or the other
should be present in the body of an animal. Odd and even, again, are
predicated of number, and it is necessary that the one or the other
should be present in numbers. Now there is no intermediate between the
terms of either of these two pairs. On the other hand, in those
contraries with regard to which no such necessity obtains, we find an
intermediate. Blackness and whiteness are naturally present in the
body, but it is not necessary that either the one or the other should
be present in the body, inasmuch as it is not true to say that
everybody must be white or black. Badness and goodness, again, are
predicated of man, and of many other things, but it is not necessary
that either the one quality or the other should be present in that of
which they are predicated: it is not true to say that everything that
may be good or bad must be either good or bad. These pairs of
contraries have intermediates: the intermediates between white and
black are grey, sallow, and all the other colours that come between;
the intermediate between good and bad is that which is neither the one
nor the other.

Some intermediate qualities have names, such as grey and sallow and all
the other colours that come between white and black; in other cases,
however, it is not easy to name the intermediate, but we must define it
as that which is not either extreme, as in the case of that which is
neither good nor bad, neither just nor unjust.

(iii) 'privatives' and 'positives' have reference to the same subject.
Thus, sight and blindness have reference to the eye. It is a universal
rule that each of a pair of opposites of this type has reference to
that to which the particular 'positive' is natural. We say that that is
capable of some particular faculty or possession has suffered privation
when the faculty or possession in question is in no way present in that
in which, and at the time at which, it should naturally be present. We
do not call that toothless which has not teeth, or that blind which has
not sight, but rather that which has not teeth or sight at the time
when by nature it should. For there are some creatures which from birth
are without sight, or without teeth, but these are not called toothless
or blind.

To be without some faculty or to possess it is not the same as the
corresponding 'privative' or 'positive'. 'Sight' is a 'positive',
'blindness' a 'privative', but 'to possess sight' is not equivalent to
'sight', 'to be blind' is not equivalent to 'blindness'. Blindness is a
'privative', to be blind is to be in a state of privation, but is not a
'privative'. Moreover, if 'blindness' were equivalent to 'being blind',
both would be predicated of the same subject; but though a man is said
to be blind, he is by no means said to be blindness.

To be in a state of 'possession' is, it appears, the opposite of being
in a state of 'privation', just as 'positives' and 'privatives'
themselves are opposite. There is the same type of antithesis in both
cases; for just as blindness is opposed to sight, so is being blind
opposed to having sight.

That which is affirmed or denied is not itself affirmation or denial.
By 'affirmation' we mean an affirmative proposition, by 'denial' a
negative. Now, those facts which form the matter of the affirmation or
denial are not propositions; yet these two are said to be opposed in
the same sense as the affirmation and denial, for in this case also the
type of antithesis is the same. For as the affirmation is opposed to
the denial, as in the two propositions 'he sits', 'he does not sit', so
also the fact which constitutes the matter of the proposition in one
case is opposed to that in the other, his sitting, that is to say, to
his not sitting.

It is evident that 'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed each to
each in the same sense as relatives. The one is not explained by
reference to the other; sight is not sight of blindness, nor is any
other preposition used to indicate the relation. Similarly blindness is
not said to be blindness of sight, but rather, privation of sight.
Relatives, moreover, reciprocate; if blindness, therefore, were a
relative, there would be a reciprocity of relation between it and that
with which it was correlative. But this is not the case. Sight is not
called the sight of blindness.

That those terms which fall under the heads of 'positives' and
'privatives' are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is
plain from the following facts: Of a pair of contraries such that they
have no intermediate, one or the other must needs be present in the
subject in which they naturally subsist, or of which they are
predicated; for it is those, as we proved, in the case of which this
necessity obtains, that have no intermediate. Moreover, we cited health
and disease, odd and even, as instances. But those contraries which
have an intermediate are not subject to any such necessity. It is not
necessary that every substance, receptive of such qualities, should be
either black or white, cold or hot, for something intermediate between
these contraries may very well be present in the subject. We proved,
moreover, that those contraries have an intermediate in the case of
which the said necessity does not obtain. Yet when one of the two
contraries is a constitutive property of the subject, as it is a
constitutive property of fire to be hot, of snow to be white, it is
necessary determinately that one of the two contraries, not one or the
other, should be present in the subject; for fire cannot be cold, or
snow black. Thus, it is not the case here that one of the two must
needs be present in every subject receptive of these qualities, but
only in that subject of which the one forms a constitutive property.
Moreover, in such cases it is one member of the pair determinately, and
not either the one or the other, which must be present.

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', on the other hand, neither
of the aforesaid statements holds good. For it is not necessary that a
subject receptive of the qualities should always have either the one or
the other; that which has not yet advanced to the state when sight is
natural is not said either to be blind or to see. Thus 'positives' and
'privatives' do not belong to that class of contraries which consists
of those which have no intermediate. On the other hand, they do not
belong either to that class which consists of contraries which have an
intermediate. For under certain conditions it is necessary that either
the one or the other should form part of the constitution of every
appropriate subject. For when a thing has reached the stage when it is
by nature capable of sight, it will be said either to see or to be
blind, and that in an indeterminate sense, signifying that the capacity
may be either present or absent; for it is not necessary either that it
should see or that it should be blind, but that it should be either in
the one state or in the other. Yet in the case of those contraries
which have an intermediate we found that it was never necessary that
either the one or the other should be present in every appropriate
subject, but only that in certain subjects one of the pair should be
present, and that in a determinate sense. It is, therefore, plain that
'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed each to each in either of
the senses in which contraries are opposed.

Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should be
changes from either into the other, while the subject retains its
identity, unless indeed one of the contraries is a constitutive
property of that subject, as heat is of fire. For it is possible that
that that which is healthy should become diseased, that which is white,
black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad, that which is
bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into a better way of
life and thought, may make some advance, however slight, and if he
should once improve, even ever so little, it is plain that he might
change completely, or at any rate make very great progress; for a man
becomes more and more easily moved to virtue, however small the
improvement was at first. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that he
will make yet greater progress than he has made in the past; and as
this process goes on, it will change him completely and establish him
in the contrary state, provided he is not hindered by lack of time. In
the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', however, change in both
directions is impossible. There may be a change from possession to
privation, but not from privation to possession. The man who has become
blind does not regain his sight; the man who has become bald does not
regain his hair; the man who has lost his teeth does not grow a new
set.

(iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and negation belong
manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this case, and in this
case only, it is necessary for the one opposite to be true and the
other false.

Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of correlatives, nor
in the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', is it necessary for one to
be true and the other false. Health and disease are contraries: neither
of them is true or false. 'Double' and 'half' are opposed to each other
as correlatives: neither of them is true or false. The case is the
same, of course, with regard to 'positives' and 'privatives' such as
'sight' and 'blindness'. In short, where there is no sort of
combination of words, truth and falsity have no place, and all the
opposites we have mentioned so far consist of simple words.

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed statements
are contraries, these, more than any other set of opposites, would seem
to claim this characteristic. 'Socrates is ill' is the contrary of
'Socrates is well', but not even of such composite expressions is it
true to say that one of the pair must always be true and the other
false. For if Socrates exists, one will be true and the other false,
but if he does not exist, both will be false; for neither 'Socrates is
ill' nor 'Socrates is well' is true, if Socrates does not exist at all.

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', if the subject does not
exist at all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject
exists, it is not always the fact that one is true and the other false.
For 'Socrates has sight' is the opposite of 'Socrates is blind' in the
sense of the word 'opposite' which applies to possession and privation.
Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary that one should be true and
the other false, for when he is not yet able to acquire the power of
vision, both are false, as also if Socrates is altogether non-existent.

But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject exists
or not, one is always false and the other true. For manifestly, if
Socrates exists, one of the two propositions 'Socrates is ill',
'Socrates is not ill', is true, and the other false. This is likewise
the case if he does not exist; for if he does not exist, to say that he
is ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. Thus it is in the
case of those opposites only, which are opposite in the sense in which
the term is used with reference to affirmation and negation, that the
rule holds good, that one of the pair must be true and the other false.



Part 11

That the contrary of a good is an evil is shown by induction: the
contrary of health is disease, of courage, cowardice, and so on. But
the contrary of an evil is sometimes a good, sometimes an evil. For
defect, which is an evil, has excess for its contrary, this also being
an evil, and the mean, which is a good, is equally the contrary of the
one and of the other. It is only in a few cases, however, that we see
instances of this: in most, the contrary of an evil is a good.

In the case of contraries, it is not always necessary that if one
exists the other should also exist: for if all become healthy there
will be health and no disease, and again, if everything turns white,
there will be white, but no black. Again, since the fact that Socrates
is ill is the contrary of the fact that Socrates is well, and two
contrary conditions cannot both obtain in one and the same individual
at the same time, both these contraries could not exist at once: for if
that Socrates was well was a fact, then that Socrates was ill could not
possibly be one.

It is plain that contrary attributes must needs be present in subjects
which belong to the same species or genus. Disease and health require
as their subject the body of an animal; white and black require a body,
without further qualification; justice and injustice require as their
subject the human soul.

Moreover, it is necessary that pairs of contraries should in all cases
either belong to the same genus or belong to contrary genera or be
themselves genera. White and black belong to the same genus, colour;
justice and injustice, to contrary genera, virtue and vice; while good
and evil do not belong to genera, but are themselves actual genera,
with terms under them.



Part 12

There are four senses in which one thing can be said to be 'prior' to
another. Primarily and most properly the term has reference to time: in
this sense the word is used to indicate that one thing is older or more
ancient than another, for the expressions 'older' and 'more ancient'
imply greater length of time.

Secondly, one thing is said to be 'prior' to another when the sequence
of their being cannot be reversed. In this sense 'one' is 'prior' to
'two'. For if 'two' exists, it follows directly that 'one' must exist,
but if 'one' exists, it does not follow necessarily that 'two' exists:
thus the sequence subsisting cannot be reversed. It is agreed, then,
that when the sequence of two things cannot be reversed, then that one
on which the other depends is called 'prior' to that other.

In the third place, the term 'prior' is used with reference to any
order, as in the case of science and of oratory. For in sciences which
use demonstration there is that which is prior and that which is
posterior in order; in geometry, the elements are prior to the
propositions; in reading and writing, the letters of the alphabet are
prior to the syllables. Similarly, in the case of speeches, the
exordium is prior in order to the narrative.

Besides these senses of the word, there is a fourth. That which is
better and more honourable is said to have a natural priority. In
common parlance men speak of those whom they honour and love as 'coming
first' with them. This sense of the word is perhaps the most
far-fetched.

Such, then, are the different senses in which the term 'prior' is used.

Yet it would seem that besides those mentioned there is yet another.
For in those things, the being of each of which implies that of the
other, that which is in any way the cause may reasonably be said to be
by nature 'prior' to the effect. It is plain that there are instances
of this. The fact of the being of a man carries with it the truth of
the proposition that he is, and the implication is reciprocal: for if a
man is, the proposition wherein we allege that he is true, and
conversely, if the proposition wherein we allege that he is true, then
he is. The true proposition, however, is in no way the cause of the
being of the man, but the fact of the man's being does seem somehow to
be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for the truth or falsity
of the proposition depends on the fact of the man's being or not being.

Thus the word 'prior' may be used in five senses.



Part 13

The term 'simultaneous' is primarily and most appropriately applied to
those things the genesis of the one of which is simultaneous with that
of the other; for in such cases neither is prior or posterior to the
other. Such things are said to be simultaneous in point of time. Those
things, again, are 'simultaneous' in point of nature, the being of each
of which involves that of the other, while at the same time neither is
the cause of the other's being. This is the case with regard to the
double and the half, for these are reciprocally dependent, since, if
there is a double, there is also a half, and if there is a half, there
is also a double, while at the same time neither is the cause of the
being of the other.

Again, those species which are distinguished one from another and
opposed one to another within the same genus are said to be
'simultaneous' in nature. I mean those species which are distinguished
each from each by one and the same method of division. Thus the
'winged' species is simultaneous with the 'terrestrial' and the 'water'
species. These are distinguished within the same genus, and are opposed
each to each, for the genus 'animal' has the 'winged', the
'terrestrial', and the 'water' species, and no one of these is prior or
posterior to another; on the contrary, all such things appear to be
'simultaneous' in nature. Each of these also, the terrestrial, the
winged, and the water species, can be divided again into subspecies.
Those species, then, also will be 'simultaneous' in point of nature,
which, belonging to the same genus, are distinguished each from each by
one and the same method of differentiation.

But genera are prior to species, for the sequence of their being cannot
be reversed. If there is the species 'water-animal', there will be the
genus 'animal', but granted the being of the genus 'animal', it does
not follow necessarily that there will be the species 'water-animal'.

Those things, therefore, are said to be 'simultaneous' in nature, the
being of each of which involves that of the other, while at the same
time neither is in any way the cause of the other's being; those
species, also, which are distinguished each from each and opposed
within the same genus. Those things, moreover, are 'simultaneous' in
the unqualified sense of the word which come into being at the same
time.



Part 14

There are six sorts of movement: generation, destruction, increase,
diminution, alteration, and change of place.

It is evident in all but one case that all these sorts of movement are
distinct each from each. Generation is distinct from destruction,
increase and change of place from diminution, and so on. But in the
case of alteration it may be argued that the process necessarily
implies one or other of the other five sorts of motion. This is not
true, for we may say that all affections, or nearly all, produce in us
an alteration which is distinct from all other sorts of motion, for
that which is affected need not suffer either increase or diminution or
any of the other sorts of motion. Thus alteration is a distinct sort of
motion; for, if it were not, the thing altered would not only be
altered, but would forthwith necessarily suffer increase or diminution
or some one of the other sorts of motion in addition; which as a matter
of fact is not the case. Similarly that which was undergoing the
process of increase or was subject to some other sort of motion would,
if alteration were not a distinct form of motion, necessarily be
subject to alteration also. But there are some things which undergo
increase but yet not alteration. The square, for instance, if a gnomon
is applied to it, undergoes increase but not alteration, and so it is
with all other figures of this sort. Alteration and increase,
therefore, are distinct.

Speaking generally, rest is the contrary of motion. But the different
forms of motion have their own contraries in other forms; thus
destruction is the contrary of generation, diminution of increase, rest
in a place, of change of place. As for this last, change in the reverse
direction would seem to be most truly its contrary; thus motion upwards
is the contrary of motion downwards and vice versa.

In the case of that sort of motion which yet remains, of those that
have been enumerated, it is not easy to state what is its contrary. It
appears to have no contrary, unless one should define the contrary here
also either as 'rest in its quality' or as 'change in the direction of
the contrary quality', just as we defined the contrary of change of
place either as rest in a place or as change in the reverse direction.
For a thing is altered when change of quality takes place; therefore
either rest in its quality or change in the direction of the contrary
may be called the contrary of this qualitative form of motion. In this
way becoming white is the contrary of becoming black; there is
alteration in the contrary direction, since a change of a qualitative
nature takes place.



Part 15

The term 'to have' is used in various senses. In the first place it is
used with reference to habit or disposition or any other quality, for
we are said to 'have' a piece of knowledge or a virtue. Then, again, it
has reference to quantity, as, for instance, in the case of a man's
height; for he is said to 'have' a height of three or four cubits. It
is used, moreover, with regard to apparel, a man being said to 'have' a
coat or tunic; or in respect of something which we have on a part of
ourselves, as a ring on the hand: or in respect of something which is a
part of us, as hand or foot. The term refers also to content, as in the
case of a vessel and wheat, or of a jar and wine; a jar is said to
'have' wine, and a corn-measure wheat. The expression in such cases has
reference to content. Or it refers to that which has been acquired; we
are said to 'have' a house or a field. A man is also said to 'have' a
wife, and a wife a husband, and this appears to be the most remote
meaning of the term, for by the use of it we mean simply that the
husband lives with the wife.

Other senses of the word might perhaps be found, but the most ordinary
ones have all been enumerated.﻿...[They were tried] by a court empanelled from among the noble
families, and sworn upon the sacrifices. The part of accuser was taken
by Myron. They were found guilty of the sacrilege, and their bodies
were cast out of their graves and their race banished for evermore. In
view of this expiation, Epimenides the Cretan performed a purification
of the city.



Part 2

After this event there was contention for a long time between the upper
classes and the populace. Not only was the constitution at this time
oligarchical in every respect, but the poorer classes, men, women, and
children, were the serfs of the rich. They were known as Pelatae and
also as Hectemori, because they cultivated the lands of the rich at the
rent thus indicated. The whole country was in the hands of a few
persons, and if the tenants failed to pay their rent they were liable
to be haled into slavery, and their children with them. All loans
secured upon the debtor's person, a custom which prevailed until the
time of Solon, who was the first to appear as the champion of the
people. But the hardest and bitterest part of the constitution in the
eyes of the masses was their state of serfdom.  Not but what they were
also discontented with every other feature of their lot; for, to speak
generally, they had no part nor share in anything.



Part 3

Now the ancient constitution, as it existed before the time of Draco,
was organized as follows. The magistrates were elected according to
qualifications of birth and wealth. At first they governed for life,
but subsequently for terms of ten years. The first magistrates, both in
date and in importance, were the King, the Polemarch, and the Archon.
The earliest of these offices was that of the King, which existed from
ancestral antiquity. To this was added, secondly, the office of
Polemarch, on account of some of the kings proving feeble in war; for
it was on this account that Ion was invited to accept the post on an
occasion of pressing need. The last of the three offices was that of
the Archon, which most authorities state to have come into existence in
the time of Medon.  Others assign it to the time of Acastus, and adduce
as proof the fact that the nine Archons swear to execute their oaths
'as in the days of Acastus,' which seems to suggest that it was in his
time that the descendants of Codrus retired from the kingship in return
for the prerogatives conferred upon the Archon. Whichever way it may
be, the difference in date is small; but that it was the last of these
magistracies to be created is shown by the fact that the Archon has no
part in the ancestral sacrifices, as the King and the Polemarch have,
but exclusively in those of later origin. So it is only at a
comparatively late date that the office of Archon has become of great
importance, through the dignity conferred by these later additions. The
Thesmothetae were many years afterwards, when these offices had already
become annual, with the object that they might publicly record all
legal decisions, and act as guardians of them with a view to
determining the issues between litigants. Accordingly their office,
alone of those which have been mentioned, was never of more than annual
duration.

Such, then, is the relative chronological precedence of these offices.
At that time the nine Archons did not all live together.  The King
occupied the building now known as the Boculium, near the Prytaneum, as
may be seen from the fact that even to the present day the marriage of
the King's wife to Dionysus takes place there. The Archon lived in the
Prytaneum, the Polemarch in the Epilyceum. The latter building was
formerly called the Polemarcheum, but after Epilycus, during his term
of office as Polemarch, had rebuilt it and fitted it up, it was called
the Epilyceum. The Thesmothetae occupied the Thesmotheteum. In the time
of Solon, however, they all came together into the Thesmotheteum. They
had power to decide cases finally on their own authority, not, as now,
merely to hold a preliminary hearing. Such then was the arrangement of
the magistracies. The Council of Areopagus had as its constitutionally
assigned duty the protection of the laws; but in point of fact it
administered the greater and most important part of the government of
the state, and inflicted personal punishments and fines summarily upon
all who misbehaved themselves. This was the natural consequence of the
facts that the Archons were elected under qualifications of birth and
wealth, and that the Areopagus was composed of those who had served as
Archons; for which latter reason the membership of the Areopagus is the
only office which has continued to be a life-magistracy to the present
day.



Part 4

Such was, in outline, the first constitution, but not very long after
the events above recorded, in the archonship of Aristaichmus, Draco
enacted his ordinances. Now his constitution had the following form.
The franchise was given to all who could furnish themselves with a
military equipment. The nine Archons and the Treasurers were elected by
this body from persons possessing an unencumbered property of not less
than ten minas, the less important officials from those who could
furnish themselves with a military equipment, and the generals
[Strategi] and commanders of the cavalry [Hipparchi] from those who
could show an unencumbered property of not less than a hundred minas,
and had children born in lawful wedlock over ten years of age. These
officers were required to hold to bail the Prytanes, the Strategi, and
the Hipparchi of the preceding year until their accounts had been
audited, taking four securities of the same class as that to which the
Strategi and the Hipparchi belonged. There was also to be a Council,
consisting of four hundred and one members, elected by lot from among
those who possessed the franchise. Both for this and for the other
magistracies the lot was cast among those who were over thirty years of
age; and no one might hold office twice until every one else had had
his turn, after which they were to cast the lot afresh. If any member
of the Council failed to attend when there was a sitting of the Council
or of the Assembly, he paid a fine, to the amount of three drachmas if
he was a Pentacosiomedimnus, two if he was a Knight, and One if he was
a Zeugites. The Council of Areopagus was guardian of the laws, and kept
watch over the magistrates to see that they executed their offices in
accordance with the laws. Any person who felt himself wronged might lay
an information before the Council of Areopagus, on declaring what law
was broken by the wrong done to him. But, as has been said before,
loans were secured upon the persons of the debtors, and the land was in
the hands of a few.



Part 5

Since such, then, was the organization of the constitution, and the
many were in slavery to the few, the people rose against the upper
class. The strife was keen, and for a long time the two parties were
ranged in hostile camps against one another, till at last, by common
consent, they appointed Solon to be mediator and Archon, and committed
the whole constitution to his hands. The immediate occasion of his
appointment was his poem, which begins with the words:

  I behold, and within my heart deep sadness has claimed its place,
  As I mark the oldest home of the ancient Ionian race
  Slain by the sword.


In this poem he fights and disputes on behalf of each party in turn
against the other, and finally he advises them to come to terms and put
an end to the quarrel existing between them. By birth and reputation
Solon was one of the foremost men of the day, but in wealth and
position he was of the middle class, as is generally agreed, and is,
indeed, established by his own evidence in these poems, where he
exhorts the wealthy not to be grasping.

  But ye who have store of good, who are sated and overflow,
  Restrain your swelling soul, and still it and keep it low:
  Let the heart that is great within you be trained a lowlier way;
  Ye shall not have all at your will, and we will not for ever obey.

Indeed, he constantly fastens the blame of the conflict on the rich;
and accordingly at the beginning of the poem he says that he fears 'the
love of wealth and an overweening mind', evidently meaning that it was
through these that the quarrel arose.



Part 6

As soon as he was at the head of affairs, Solon liberated the people
once and for all, by prohibiting all loans on the security of the
debtor's person: and in addition he made laws by which he cancelled all
debts, public and private. This measure is commonly called the
Seisachtheia [= removal of burdens], since thereby the people had their
loads removed from them. In connexion with it some persons try to
traduce the character of Solon. It so happened that, when he was about
to enact the Seisachtheia, he communicated his intention to some
members of the upper class, whereupon, as the partisans of the popular
party say, his friends stole a march on him; while those who wish to
attack his character maintain that he too had a share in the fraud
himself. For these persons borrowed money and bought up a large amount
of land, and so when, a short time afterwards, all debts were
cancelled, they became wealthy; and this, they say, was the origin of
the families which were afterwards looked on as having been wealthy
from primeval times. However, the story of the popular party is by far
the most probable. A man who was so moderate and public-spirited in all
his other actions, that when it was within his power to put his
fellow-citizens beneath his feet and establish himself as tyrant, he
preferred instead to incur the hostility of both parties by placing his
honour and the general welfare above his personal aggrandisement, is
not likely to have consented to defile his hands by such a petty and
palpable fraud. That he had this absolute power is, in the first place,
indicated by the desperate condition the country; moreover, he mentions
it himself repeatedly in his poems, and it is universally admitted. We
are therefore bound to consider this accusation to be false.



Part 7

Next Solon drew up a constitution and enacted new laws; and the
ordinances of Draco ceased to be used, with the exception of those
relating to murder. The laws were inscribed on the wooden stands, and
set up in the King's Porch, and all swore to obey them; and the nine
Archons made oath upon the stone, declaring that they would dedicate a
golden statue if they should transgress any of them. This is the origin
of the oath to that effect which they take to the present day. Solon
ratified his laws for a hundred years; and the following was the
fashion in which he organized the constitution. He divided the
population according to property into four classes, just as it had been
divided before, namely, Pentacosiomedimni, Knights, Zeugitae, and
Thetes. The various magistracies, namely, the nine Archons, the
Treasurers, the Commissioners for Public Contracts (Poletae), the
Eleven, and Clerks (Colacretae), he assigned to the Pentacosiomedimni,
the Knights, and the Zeugitae, giving offices to each class in
proportion to the value of their rateable property. To who ranked among
the Thetes he gave nothing but a place in the Assembly and in the
juries. A man had to rank as a Pentacosiomedimnus if he made, from his
own land, five hundred measures, whether liquid or solid. Those ranked
as Knights who made three hundred measures, or, as some say, those who
were able to maintain a horse. In support of the latter definition they
adduce the name of the class, which may be supposed to be derived from
this fact, and also some votive offerings of early times; for in the
Acropolis there is a votive offering, a statue of Diphilus, bearing
this inscription:

  The son of Diphilus, Athenion hight,
  Raised from the Thetes and become a knight,
  Did to the gods this sculptured charger bring,
  For his promotion a thank-offering.

And a horse stands in evidence beside the man, implying that this was
what was meant by belonging to the rank of Knight. At the same time it
seems reasonable to suppose that this class, like the
Pentacosiomedimni, was defined by the possession of an income of a
certain number of measures. Those ranked as Zeugitae who made two
hundred measures, liquid or solid; and the rest ranked as Thetes, and
were not eligible for any office. Hence it is that even at the present
day, when a candidate for any office is asked to what class he belongs,
no one would think of saying that he belonged to the Thetes.



Part 8

The elections to the various offices Solon enacted should be by lot,
out of candidates selected by each of the tribes. Each tribe selected
ten candidates for the nine archonships, and among these the lot was
cast. Hence it is still the custom for each tribe to choose ten
candidates by lot, and then the lot is again cast among these. A proof
that Solon regulated the elections to office according to the property
classes may be found in the law still in force with regard to the
Treasurers, which enacts that they shall be chosen from the
Pentacosiomedimni. Such was Solon's legislation with respect to the
nine Archons; whereas in early times the Council of Areopagus summoned
suitable persons according to its own judgement and appointed them for
the year to the several offices. There were four tribes, as before, and
four tribe-kings. Each tribe was divided into three Trittyes [=Thirds],
with twelve Naucraries in each; and the Naucraries had officers of
their own, called Naucrari, whose duty it was to superintend the
current receipts and expenditure. Hence, among the laws of Solon now
obsolete, it is repeatedly written that the Naucrari are to receive and
to spend out of the Naucraric fund.  Solon also appointed a Council of
four hundred, a hundred from each tribe; but he assigned to the Council
of the Areopagus the duty of superintending the laws, acting as before
as the guardian of the constitution in general. It kept watch over the
affairs of the state in most of the more important matters, and
corrected offenders, with full powers to inflict either fines or
personal punishment. The money received in fines it brought up into the
Acropolis, without assigning the reason for the mulct. It also tried
those who conspired for the overthrow of the state, Solon having
enacted a process of impeachment to deal with such offenders. Further,
since he saw the state often engaged in internal disputes, while many
of the citizens from sheer indifference accepted whatever might turn
up, he made a law with express reference to such persons, enacting that
any one who, in a time [Transcriber's note: of?] civil factions, did
not take up arms with either party, should lose his rights as a citizen
and cease to have any part in the state.



Part 9

Such, then, was his legislation concerning the magistracies. There are
three points in the constitution of Solon which appear to be its most
democratic features: first and most important, the prohibition of loans
on the security of the debtor's person; secondly, the right of every
person who so willed to claim redress on behalf of any one to whom
wrong was being done; thirdly, the institution of the appeal to the
jurycourts; and it is to this last, they say, that the masses have owed
their strength most of all, since, when the democracy is master of the
voting-power, it is master of the constitution.  Moreover, since the
laws were not drawn up in simple and explicit terms (but like the one
concerning inheritances and wards of state), disputes inevitably
occurred, and the courts had to decide in every matter, whether public
or private. Some persons in fact believe that Solon deliberately made
the laws indefinite, in order that the final decision might be in the
hands of the people. This, however, is not probable, and the reason no
doubt was that it is impossible to attain ideal perfection when framing
a law in general terms; for we must judge of his intentions, not from
the actual results in the present day, but from the general tenor of
the rest of his legislation.



Part 10

These seem to be the democratic features of his laws; but in addition,
before the period of his legislation, he carried through his abolition
of debts, and after it his increase in the standards of weights and
measures, and of the currency. During his administration the measures
were made larger than those of Pheidon, and the mina, which previously
had a standard of seventy drachmas, was raised to the full hundred. The
standard coin in earlier times was the two-drachma piece. He also made
weights corresponding with the coinage, sixty-three minas going to the
talent; and the odd three minas were distributed among the staters and
the other values.



Part 11

When he had completed his organization of the constitution in the
manner that has been described, he found himself beset by people coming
to him and harassing him concerning his laws, criticizing here and
questioning there, till, as he wished neither to alter what he had
decided on nor yet to be an object of ill will to every one by
remaining in Athens, he set off on a journey to Egypt, with the
combined objects of trade and travel, giving out that he should not
return for ten years. He considered that there was no call for him to
expound the laws personally, but that every one should obey them just
as they were written. Moreover, his position at this time was
unpleasant. Many members of the upper class had been estranged from him
on account of his abolition of debts, and both parties were alienated
through their disappointment at the condition of things which he had
created. The mass of the people had expected him to make a complete
redistribution of all property, and the upper class hoped he would
restore everything to its former position, or, at any rate, make but a
small change. Solon, however, had resisted both classes. He might have
made himself a despot by attaching himself to whichever party he chose,
but he preferred, though at the cost of incurring the enmity of both,
to be the saviour of his country and the ideal lawgiver.



Part 12

The truth of this view of Solon's policy is established alike by common
consent, and by the mention he has himself made of the matter in his
poems. Thus:

  I gave to the mass of the people such rank as befitted their need,
  I took not away their honour, and I granted naught to their greed;
  While those who were rich in power, who in wealth were glorious
      and great,
  I bethought me that naught should befall them unworthy their
      splendour and state;
  So I stood with my shield outstretched, and both were safe in
      its sight,
  And I would not that either should triumph, when the triumph was
      not with right.


Again he declares how the mass of the people ought to be treated:

  But thus will the people best the voice of their leaders obey,
  When neither too slack is the rein, nor violence holdeth the sway;
  For indulgence breedeth a child, the presumption that spurns control,
  When riches too great are poured upon men of unbalanced soul.

And again elsewhere he speaks about the persons who wished to
redistribute the land:

  So they came in search of plunder, and their cravings knew no bound,
  Every one among them deeming endless wealth would here be found.
  And that I with glozing smoothness hid a cruel mind within.
  Fondly then and vainly dreamt they; now they raise an angry din,
  And they glare askance in anger, and the light within their eyes
  Burns with hostile flames upon me. Yet therein no justice lies.
  All I promised, fully wrought I with the gods at hand to cheer,
  Naught beyond in folly ventured. Never to my soul was dear
  With a tyrant's force to govern, nor to see the good and base
  Side by side in equal portion share the rich home of our race.


Once more he speaks of the abolition of debts and of those who before
were in servitude, but were released owing to the Seisachtheia:

  Of all the aims for which I summoned forth
  The people, was there one I compassed not?
  Thou, when slow time brings justice in its train,
  O mighty mother of the Olympian gods,
  Dark Earth, thou best canst witness, from whose breast
  I swept the pillars broadcast planted there,
  And made thee free, who hadst been slave of yore.
  And many a man whom fraud or law had sold
  For from his god-built land, an outcast slave,
  I brought again to Athens; yea, and some,
  Exiles from home through debt's oppressive load,
  Speaking no more the dear ATHENIAN tongue,
  But wandering far and wide, I brought again;

  And those that here in vilest slavery
  Crouched 'neath a master's frown, I set them free.
  Thus might and right were yoked in harmony,
  Since by the force of law I won my ends
  And kept my promise. Equal laws I gave
  To evil and to good, with even hand
  Drawing straight justice for the lot of each.
  But had another held the goad as
  One in whose heart was guile and greediness,
  He had not kept the people back from strife.
  For had I granted, now what pleased the one,
  Then what their foes devised in counterpoise,
  Of many a man this state had been bereft.
  Therefore I showed my might on every side,
  Turning at bay like wolf among the hounds.


And again he reviles both parties for their grumblings in the times
that followed:

  Nay, if one must lay blame where blame is due,
  Wer't not for me, the people ne'er had set
  Their eyes upon these blessings e'en in dreams:
  While greater men, the men of wealthier life,
  Should praise me and should court me as their friend.

For had any other man, he says, received this exalted post,

  He had not kept the people back, nor ceased
  Til he had robbed the richness of the milk.
  But I stood forth a landmark in the midst,
  And barred the foes from battle.



Part 13

Such then, were Solon's reasons for his departure from the country.
After his retirement the city was still torn by divisions.  For four
years, indeed, they lived in peace; but in the fifth year after Solon's
government they were unable to elect an Archon on account of their
dissensions, and again four years later they elected no Archon for the
same reason. Subsequently, after a similar period had elapsed, Damasias
was elected Archon; and he governed for two years and two months, until
he was forcibly expelled from his office. After this, it was agreed, as
a compromise, to elect ten Archons, five from the Eupatridae, three
from the Agroeci, and two from the Demiurgi, and they ruled for the
year following Damasias.  It is clear from this that the Archon was at
the time the magistrate who possessed the greatest power, since it is
always in connexion with this office that conflicts are seen to arise.
But altogether they were in a continual state of internal disorder.
Some found the cause and justification of their discontent in the
abolition of debts, because thereby they had been reduced to poverty;
others were dissatisfied with the political constitution, because it
had undergone a revolutionary change; while with others the motive was
found in personal rivalries among themselves. The parties at this time
were three in number. First there was the party of the Shore, led by
Megacles the son of Alcmeon, which was considered to aim at a moderate
form of government; then there were the men of the Plain, who desired
an oligarchy and were led by Lycurgus; and thirdly there were the men
of the Highlands, at the head of whom was Pisistratus, who was looked
on as an extreme democrat. This latter party was reinforced by those
who had been deprived of the debts due to them, from motives of
poverty, and by those who were not of pure descent, from motives of
personal apprehension. A proof of this is seen in the fact that after
the tyranny was overthrown a revision was made of the citizen-roll, on
the ground that many persons were partaking in the franchise without
having a right to it. The names given to the respective parties were
derived from the districts in which they held their lands.



Part 14

Pisistratus had the reputation of being an extreme democrat, and he
also had distinguished himself greatly in the war with Megara.  Taking
advantage of this, he wounded himself, and by representing that his
injuries had been inflicted on him by his political rivals, he
persuaded the people, through a motion proposed by Aristion, to grant
him a bodyguard. After he had got these 'club-bearers', as they were
called, he made an attack with them on the people and seized the
Acropolis. This happened in the archonship of Comeas, thirty-one years
after the legislation of Solon. It is related that, when Pisistratus
asked for his bodyguard, Solon opposed the request, and declared that
in so doing he proved himself wiser than half the people and braver
than the rest,--wiser than those who did not see that Pisistratus
designed to make himself tyrant, and braver than those who saw it and
kept silence. But when all his words availed nothing he carried forth
his armour and set it up in front of his house, saying that he had
helped his country so far as lay in his power (he was already a very
old man), and that he called on all others to do the same. Solon's
exhortations, however, proved fruitless, and Pisistratus assumed the
sovereignty. His administration was more like a constitutional
government than the rule of a tyrant; but before his power was firmly
established, the adherents of Megacles and Lycurgus made a coalition
and drove him out. This took place in the archonship of Hegesias, five
years after the first establishment of his rule. Eleven years later
Megacles, being in difficulties in a party struggle, again opened
negotiations with Pisistratus, proposing that the latter should marry
his daughter; and on these terms he brought him back to Athens, by a
very primitive and simple-minded device. He first spread abroad a
rumour that Athens was bringing back Pisistratus, and then, having
found a woman of great stature and beauty, named Phye (according to
Herodotus, of the deme of Paeania, but as others say a Thracian
flower-seller of the deme of Collytus), he dressed her in a garb
resembling that of the goddess and brought her into the city with
Pisistratus. The latter drove in on a chariot with the woman beside
him, and the inhabitants of the city, struck with awe, received him
with adoration.



Part 15

In this manner did his first return take place. He did not, however,
hold his power long, for about six years after his return he was again
expelled. He refused to treat the daughter of Megacles as his wife, and
being afraid, in consequence, of a combination of the two opposing
parties, he retired from the country. First he led a colony to a place
called Rhaicelus, in the region of the Thermaic gulf; and thence he
passed to the country in the neighbourhood of Mt. Pangaeus. Here he
acquired wealth and hired mercenaries; and not till ten years had
elapsed did he return to Eretria and make an attempt to recover the
government by force. In this he had the assistance of many allies,
notably the Thebans and Lygdamis of Naxos, and also the Knights who
held the supreme power in the constitution of Eretria. After his
victory in the battle at Pallene he captured Athens, and when he had
disarmed the people he at last had his tyranny securely established,
and was able to take Naxos and set up Lygdamis as ruler there. He
effected the disarmament of the people in the following manner. He
ordered a parade in full armour in the Theseum, and began to make a
speech to the people. He spoke for a short time, until the people
called out that they could not hear him, whereupon he bade them come up
to the entrance of the Acropolis, in order that his voice might be
better heard. Then, while he continued to speak to them at great
length, men whom he had appointed for the purpose collected the arms
and locked them up in the chambers of the Theseum hard by, and came and
made a signal to him that it was done. Pisistratus accordingly, when he
had finished the rest of what he had to say, told the people also what
had happened to their arms; adding that they were not to be surprised
or alarmed, but go home and attend to their private affairs, while he
would himself for the future manage all the business of the state.



Part 16

Such was the origin and such the vicissitudes of the tyranny of
Pisistratus. His administration was temperate, as has been said before,
and more like constitutional government than a tyranny. Not only was he
in every respect humane and mild and ready to forgive those who
offended, but, in addition, he advanced money to the poorer people to
help them in their labours, so that they might make their living by
agriculture. In this he had two objects, first that they might not
spend their time in the city but might be scattered over all the face
of the country, and secondly that, being moderately well off and
occupied with their own business, they might have neither the wish nor
the time to attend to public affairs. At the same time his revenues
were increased by the thorough cultivation of the country, since he
imposed a tax of one tenth on all the produce.  For the same reasons he
instituted the local justices, and often made expeditions in person
into the country to inspect it and to settle disputes between
individuals, that they might not come into the city and neglect their
farms. It was in one of these progresses that, as the story goes,
Pisistratus had his adventure with the man of Hymettus, who was
cultivating the spot afterwards known as 'Tax-free Farm'. He saw a man
digging and working at a very stony piece of ground, and being
surprised he sent his attendant to ask what he got out of this plot of
land. 'Aches and pains', said the man; 'and that's what Pisistratus
ought to have his tenth of'. The man spoke without knowing who his
questioner was; but Pisistratus was so pleased with his frank speech and
his industry that he granted him exemption from all taxes. And so in
matters in general he burdened the people as little as possible with
his government, but always cultivated peace and kept them in all
quietness. Hence the tyranny of Pisistratus was often spoken of
proverbially as 'the age of gold'; for when his sons succeeded him the
government became much harsher. But most important of all in this
respect was his popular and kindly disposition. In all things he was
accustomed to observe the laws, without giving himself any exceptional
privileges. Once he was summoned on a charge of homicide before the
Areopagus, and he appeared in person to make his defence; but the
prosecutor was afraid to present himself and abandoned the case. For
these reasons he held power long, and whenever he was expelled he
regained his position easily. The majority alike of the upper class and
of the people were in his favour; the former he won by his social
intercourse with them, the latter by the assistance which he gave to
their private purses, and his nature fitted him to win the hearts of
both. Moreover, the laws in reference to tyrants at that time in force
at Athens were very mild, especially the one which applies more
particularly to the establishment of a tyranny. The law ran as follows:
'These are the ancestral statutes of the ATHENIANs; if any persons
shall make an attempt to establish a tyranny, or if any person shall
join in setting up a tyranny, he shall lose his civic rights, both
himself and his whole house.'



Part 17

Thus did Pisistratus grow old in the possession of power, and he died a
natural death in the archonship of Philoneos, three and thirty years
from the time at which he first established himself as tyrant, during
nineteen of which he was in possession of power; the rest he spent in
exile. It is evident from this that the story is mere gossip which
states that Pisistratus was the youthful favourite of Solon and
commanded in the war against Megara for the recovery of Salamis. It
will not harmonize with their respective ages, as any one may see who
will reckon up the years of the life of each of them, and the dates at
which they died. After the death of Pisistratus his sons took up the
government, and conducted it on the same system. He had two sons by his
first and legitimate wife, Hippias and Hipparchus, and two by his
Argive consort, Iophon and Hegesistratus, who was surnamed Thessalus.
For Pisistratus took a wife from Argos, Timonassa, the daughter of a
man of Argos, named Gorgilus; she had previously been the wife of
Archinus of Ambracia, one of the descendants of Cypselus. This was the
origin of his friendship with the Argives, on account of which a
thousand of them were brought over by Hegesistratus and fought on his
side in the battle at Pallene.  Some authorities say that this marriage
took place after his first expulsion from Athens, others while he was
in possession of the government.



Part 18

Hippias and Hipparchus assumed the control of affairs on grounds alike
of standing and of age; but Hippias, as being also naturally of a
statesmanlike and shrewd disposition, was really the head of the
government. Hipparchus was youthful in disposition, amorous, and fond
of literature (it was he who invited to Athens Anacreon, Simonides, and
the other poets), while Thessalus was much junior in age, and was
violent and headstrong in his behaviour. It was from his character that
all the evils arose which befell the house. He became enamoured of
Harmodius, and, since he failed to win his affection, he lost all
restraint upon his passion, and in addition to other exhibitions of
rage he finally prevented the sister of Harmodius from taking the part
of a basket-bearer in the Panathenaic procession, alleging as his
reason that Harmodius was a person of loose life. Thereupon, in a
frenzy of wrath, Harmodius and Aristogeiton did their celebrated deed,
in conjunction with a number of confederates. But while they were lying
in wait for Hippias in the Acropolis at the time of the Panathenaea
(Hippias, at this moment, was awaiting the arrival of the procession,
while Hipparchus was organizing its dispatch) they saw one of the
persons privy to the plot talking familiarly with him. Thinking that he
was betraying them, and desiring to do something before they were
arrested, they rushed down and made their attempt without waiting for
the rest of their confederates. They succeeded in killing Hipparchus
near the Leocoreum while he was engaged in arranging the procession,
but ruined the design as a whole; of the two leaders, Harmodius was
killed on the spot by the guards, while Aristogeiton was arrested, and
perished later after suffering long tortures. While under the torture
he accused many persons who belonged by birth to the most distinguished
families and were also personal friends of the tyrants. At first the
government could find no clue to the conspiracy; for the current story,
that Hippias made all who were taking part in the procession leave
their arms, and then detected those who were carrying secret daggers,
cannot be true, since at that time they did not bear arms in the
processions, this being a custom instituted at a later period by the
democracy. According to the story of the popular party, Aristogeiton
accused the friends of the tyrants with the deliberate intention that
the latter might commit an impious act, and at the same time weaken
themselves, by putting to death innocent men who were their own
friends; others say that he told no falsehood, but was betraying the
actual accomplices. At last, when for all his efforts he could not
obtain release by death, he promised to give further information
against a number of other persons; and, having induced Hippias to give
him his hand to confirm his word, as soon as he had hold of it he
reviled him for giving his hand to the murderer of his brother, till
Hippias, in a frenzy of rage, lost control of himself and snatched out
his dagger and dispatched him.



Part 19

After this event the tyranny became much harsher. In consequence of his
vengeance for his brother, and of the execution and banishment of a
large number of persons, Hippias became a distrusted and an embittered
man. About three years after the death of Hipparchus, finding his
position in the city insecure, he set about fortifying Munichia, with
the intention of establishing himself there.  While he was still
engaged on this work, however, he was expelled by Cleomenes, king of
Lacedaemon, in consequence of the Spartans being continually incited by
oracles to overthrow the tyranny.  These oracles were obtained in the
following way. The Athenian exiles, headed by the Alcmeonidae, could
not by their own power effect their return, but failed continually in
their attempts. Among their other failures, they fortified a post in
Attica, Lipsydrium, above Mt. Parnes, and were there joined by some
partisans from the city; but they were besieged by the tyrants and
reduced to surrender. After this disaster the following became a
popular drinking song:

  Ah! Lipsydrium, faithless friend!
  Lo, what heroes to death didst send,
  Nobly born and great in deed!
  Well did they prove themselves at need
  Of noble sires a noble seed.


Having failed, then, in every other method, they took the contract for
rebuilding the temple at Delphi, thereby obtaining ample funds, which
they employed to secure the help of the Lacedaemonians. All this time
the Pythia kept continually enjoining on the Lacedaemonians who came to
consult the oracle, that they must free Athens; till finally she
succeeded in impelling the Spartans to that step, although the house of
Pisistratus was connected with them by ties of hospitality.  The
resolution of the Lacedaemonians was, however, at least equally due to
the friendship which had been formed between the house of Pisistratus
and Argos. Accordingly they first sent Anchimolus by sea at the head of
an army; but he was defeated and killed, through the arrival of Cineas
of Thessaly to support the sons of Pisistratus with a force of a
thousand horsemen. Then, being roused to anger by this disaster, they
sent their king, Cleomenes, by land at the head of a larger force; and
he, after defeating the Thessalian cavalry when they attempted to
intercept his march into Attica, shut up Hippias within what was known
as the Pelargic wall and blockaded him there with the assistance of the
Athenians. While he was sitting down before the place, it so happened
that the sons of the Pisistratidae were captured in an attempt to slip
out; upon which the tyrants capitulated on condition of the safety of
their children, and surrendered the Acropolis to the Athenians, five
days being first allowed them to remove their effects. This took place
in the archonship of Harpactides, after they had held the tyranny for
about seventeen years since their father's death, or in all, including
the period of their father's rule, for nine-and-forty years.



Part 20

After the overthrow of the tyranny, the rival leaders in the state were
Isagoras son of Tisander, a partisan of the tyrants, and Cleisthenes,
who belonged to the family of the Alcmeonidae.  Cleisthenes, being
beaten in the political clubs, called in the people by giving the
franchise to the masses. Thereupon Isagoras, finding himself left
inferior in power, invited Cleomenes, who was united to him by ties of
hospitality, to return to Athens, and persuaded him to 'drive out the
pollution', a plea derived from the fact that the Alcmeonidae were
suppposed to be under the curse of pollution. On this Cleisthenes
retired from the country, and Cleomenes, entering Attica with a small
force, expelled, as polluted, seven hundred Athenian families. Having
effected this, he next attempted to dissolve the Council, and to set up
Isagoras and three hundred of his partisans as the supreme power in the
state. The Council, however, resisted, the populace flocked together,
and Cleomenes and Isagoras, with their adherents, took refuge in the
Acropolis. Here the people sat down and besieged them for two days; and
on the third they agreed to let Cleomenes and all his followers depart,
while they summoned Cleisthenes and the other exiles back to Athens.
When the people had thus obtained the command of affairs, Cleisthenes
was their chief and popular leader. And this was natural; for the
Alcmeonidae were perhaps the chief cause of the expulsion of the
tyrants, and for the greater part of their rule were at perpetual war
with them. But even earlier than the attempts of the Alcmeonidae, one
Cedon made an attack on the tyrants; when there came another popular
drinking song, addressed to him:

  Pour a health yet again, boy, to Cedon; forget not this duty to do,
  If a health is an honour befitting the name of a good man and true.



Part 21

The people, therefore, had good reason to place confidence in
Cleisthenes. Accordingly, now that he was the popular leader, three
years after the expulsion of the tyrants, in the archonship of
Isagoras, his first step was to distribute the whole population into
ten tribes in place of the existing four, with the object of
intermixing the members of the different tribes, and so securing that
more persons might have a share in the franchise. From this arose the
saying 'Do not look at the tribes', addressed to those who wished to
scrutinize the lists of the old families. Next he made the Council to
consist of five hundred members instead of four hundred, each tribe now
contributing fifty, whereas formerly each had sent a hundred. The
reason why he did not organize the people into twelve tribes was that
he might not have to use the existing division into trittyes; for the
four tribes had twelve trittyes, so that he would not have achieved his
object of redistributing the population in fresh combinations. Further,
he divided the country into thirty groups of demes, ten from the
districts about the city, ten from the coast, and ten from the
interior. These he called trittyes; and he assigned three of them by
lot to each tribe, in such a way that each should have one portion in
each of these three localities. All who lived in any given deme he
declared fellow-demesmen, to the end that the new citizens might not be
exposed by the habitual use of family names, but that men might be
officially described by the names of their demes; and accordingly it is
by the names of their demes that the Athenians speak of one another. He
also instituted Demarchs, who had the same duties as the previously
existing Naucrari,--the demes being made to take the place of the
naucraries. He gave names to the demes, some from the localities to
which they belonged, some from the persons who founded them, since some
of the areas no longer corresponded to localities possessing names. On
the other hand he allowed every one to retain his family and clan and
religious rites according to ancestral custom. The names given to the
tribes were the ten which the Pythia appointed out of the hundred
selected national heroes.



Part 22

By these reforms the constitution became much more democratic than that
of Solon. The laws of Solon had been obliterated by disuse during the
period of the tyranny, while Cleisthenes substituted new ones with the
object of securing the goodwill of the masses. Among these was the law
concerning ostracism. Four years after the establishment of this system,
in the archonship of Hermocreon, they first imposed upon the Council of
Five Hundred the oath which they take to the present day.  Next they
began to elect the generals by tribes, one from each tribe, while the
Polemarch was the commander of the whole army.  Then, eleven years
later, in the archonship of Phaenippus they won the battle of Marathon;
and two years after this victory, when the people had now gained
self-confidence, they for the first time made use of the law of
ostracism. This had originally been passed as a precaution against men
in high office, because Pisistratus took advantage of his position as a
popular leader and general to make himself tyrant; and the first person
ostracized was one of his relatives, Hipparchus son of Charmus, of the
deme of Collytus, the very person on whose account especially
Cleisthenes had enacted the law, as he wished to get rid of him.
Hitherto, however, he had escaped; for the Athenians, with the usual
leniency of the democracy, allowed all the partisans of the tyrants,
who had not joined in their evil deeds in the time of the troubles to
remain in the city; and the chief and leader of these was Hipparchus.
Then in the very next year, in the archonship of Telesinus, they for
the first time since the tyranny elected, tribe by tribe, the nine
Archons by lot out of the five hundred candidates selected by the
demes, all the earlier ones having been elected by vote; and in the
same year Megacles son of Hippocrates, of the deme of Alopece, was
ostracized.  Thus for three years they continued to ostracize the
friends of the tyrants, on whose account the law had been passed; but
in the following year they began to remove others as well, including
any one who seemed to be more powerful than was expedient. The first
person unconnected with the tyrants who was ostracized was Xanthippus
son of Ariphron. Two years later, in the archonship of Nicodemus, the
mines of Maroneia were discovered, and the state made a profit of a
hundred talents from the working of them. Some persons advised the
people to make a distribution of the money among themselves, but this
was prevented by Themistocles. He refused to say on what he proposed to
spend the money, but he bade them lend it to the hundred richest men in
Athens, one talent to each, and then, if the manner in which it was
employed pleased the people, the expenditure should be charged to the
state, but otherwise the state should receive the sum back from those
to whom it was lent. On these terms he received the money and with it
he had a hundred triremes built, each of the hundred individuals
building one; and it was with these ships that they fought the battle
of Salamis against the barbarians. About this time Aristides the son of
Lysimachus was ostracized. Three years later, however, in the
archonship of Hypsichides, all the ostracized persons were recalled, on
account of the advance of the army of Xerxes; and it was laid down for
the future that persons under sentence of ostracism must live between
Geraestus and Scyllaeum, on pain of losing their civic rights
irrevocably.



Part 23

So far, then, had the city progressed by this time, growing gradually
with the growth of the democracy; but after the Persian wars the
Council of Areopagus once more developed strength and assumed the
control of the state. It did not acquire this supremacy by virtue of
any formal decree, but because it had been the cause of the battle of
Salamis being fought. When the generals were utterly at a loss how to
meet the crisis and made proclamation that every one should see to his
own safety, the Areopagus provided a donation of money, distributing
eight drachmas to each member of the ships' crews, and so prevailed on
them to go on board. On these grounds people bowed to its prestige; and
during this period Athens was well administered. At this time they
devoted themselves to the prosecution of the war and were in high
repute among the Greeks, so that the command by sea was conferred upon
them, in spite of the opposition of the Lacedaemonians. The leaders of
the people during this period were Aristides, of Lysimachus, and
Themistocles, son of Lysimachus, and Themistocles, son of Neocles, of
whom the latter appeared to devote himself to the conduct of war, while
the former had the reputation of being a clever statesman and the most
upright man of his time. Accordingly the one was usually employed as
general, the other as political adviser. The rebuilding of the
fortifications they conducted in combination, although they were
political opponents; but it was Aristides who, seizing the opportunity
afforded by the discredit brought upon the Lacedaemonians by Pausanias,
guided the public policy in the matter of the defection of the Ionian
states from the alliance with Sparta. It follows that it was he who
made the first assessment of tribute from the various allied states,
two years after the battle of Salamis, in the archonship of
Timosthenes; and it was he who took the oath of offensive and defensive
alliance with the Ionians, on which occasion they cast the masses of
iron into the sea.



Part 24

After this, seeing the state growing in confidence and much wealth
accumulated, he advised the people to lay hold of the leadership of the
league, and to quit the country districts and settle in the city. He
pointed out to them that all would be able to gain a living there, some
by service in the army, others in the garrisons, others by taking a
part in public affairs; and in this way they would secure the
leadership. This advice was taken; and when the people had assumed the
supreme control they proceeded to treat their allies in a more
imperious fashion, with the exception of the Chians, Lesbians, and
Samians. These they maintained to protect their empire, leaving their
constitutions untouched, and allowing them to retain whatever dominion
they then possessed. They also secured an ample maintenance for the
mass of the population in the way which Aristides had pointed out to
them. Out of the proceeds of the tributes and the taxes and the
contributions of the allies more than twenty thousand persons were
maintained. There were 6,000 jurymen, 1,600 bowmen, 1,200 Knights, 500
members of the Council, 500 guards of the dockyards, besides fifty
guards in the Acropolis. There were some 700 magistrates at home, and
some 700 abroad. Further, when they subsequently went to war, there
were in addition 2,500 heavy-armed troops, twenty guard-ships, and
other ships which collected the tributes, with crews amounting to 2,000
men, selected by lot; and besides these there were the persons
maintained at the Prytaneum, and orphans, and gaolers, since all these
were supported by the state.



Part 25

Such was the way in which the people earned their livelihood. The
supremacy of the Areopagus lasted for about seventeen years after the
Persian wars, although gradually declining. But as the strength of the
masses increased, Ephialtes, son of Sophonides, a man with a reputation
for incorruptibility and public virtue, who had become the leader of
the people, made an attack upon that Council. First of all he ruined
many of its members by bringing actions against them with reference to
their administration. Then, in the archonship of Conon, he stripped the
Council of all the acquired prerogatives from which it derived its
guardianship of the constitution, and assigned some of them to the
Council of Five Hundred, and others to the Assembly and the law-courts.
In this revolution he was assisted by Themistocles, who was himself a
member of the Areopagus, but was expecting to be tried before it on a
charge of treasonable dealings with Persia. This made him anxious that
it should be overthrown, and accordingly he warned Ephialtes that the
Council intended to arrest him, while at the same time he informed the
Areopagites that he would reveal to them certain persons who were
conspiring to subvert the constitution. He then conducted the
representatives delegated by the Council to the residence of Ephialtes,
promising to show them the conspirators who assembled there, and
proceeded to converse with them in an earnest manner. Ephialtes, seeing
this, was seized with alarm and took refuge in suppliant guise at the
altar. Every one was astounded at the occurrence, and presently, when
the Council of Five Hundred met, Ephialtes and Themistocles together
proceeded to denounce the Areopagus to them. This they repeated in
similar fashion in the Assembly, until they succeeded in depriving it
of its power. Not long afterwards, however, Ephialtes was assassinated
by Aristodicus of Tanagra. In this way was the Council of Areopagus
deprived of its guardianship of the state.



Part 26

After this revolution the administration of the state became more and
more lax, in consequence of the eager rivalry of candidates for popular
favour. During this period the moderate party, as it happened, had no
real chief, their leader being Cimon son of Miltiades, who was a
comparatively young man, and had been late in entering public life; and
at the same time the general populace suffered great losses by war. The
soldiers for active service were selected at that time from the roll of
citizens, and as the generals were men of no military experience, who
owed their position solely to their family standing, it continually
happened that some two or three thousand of the troops perished on an
expedition; and in this way the best men alike of the lower and the
upper classes were exhausted.  Consequently in most matters of
administration less heed was paid to the laws than had formerly been
the case. No alteration, however, was made in the method of election of
the nine Archons, except that five years after the death of Ephialtes
it was decided that the candidates to be submitted to the lot for that
office might be selected from the Zeugitae as well as from the higher
classes. The first Archon from that class was Mnesitheides. Up to this
time all the Archons had been taken from the Pentacosiomedimni and
Knights, while the Zeugitae were confined to the ordinary magistracies,
save where an evasion of the law was overlooked. Four years later, in
the archonship of Lysicrates, thirty 'local justices', as they as they
were called, were re-established; and two years afterwards, in the
archonship of Antidotus, consequence of the great increase in the
number of citizens, it was resolved, on the motion of Pericles, that no
one should be admitted to the franchise who was not of citizen birth by
both parents.



Part 27

After this Pericles came forward as popular leader, having first
distinguished himself while still a young man by prosecuting Cimon on
the audit of his official accounts as general. Under his auspices the
constitution became still more democratic. He took away some of the
privileges of the Areopagus, and, above all, he turned the policy of
the state in the direction of sea power, which caused the masses to
acquire confidence in themselves and consequently to take the conduct
of affairs more and more into their own hands. Moreover, forty-eight
years after the battle of Salamis, in the archonship of Pythodorus, the
Peloponnesian war broke out, during which the populace was shut up in
the city and became accustomed to gain its livelihood by military
service, and so, partly voluntarily and partly involuntarily,
determined to assume the administration of the state itself. Pericles
was also the first to institute pay for service in the law-courts, as a
bid for popular favour to counterbalance the wealth of Cimon. The
latter, having private possessions on a regal scale, not only performed
the regular public services magnificently, but also maintained a large
number of his fellow-demesmen. Any member of the deme of Laciadae could
go every day to Cimon's house and there receive a reasonable provision;
while his estate was guarded by no fences, so that any one who liked
might help himself to the fruit from it. Pericles' private property was
quite unequal to this magnificence and accordingly he took the advice
of Damonides of Oia (who was commonly supposed to be the person who
prompted Pericles in most of his measures, and was therefore
subsequently ostracized), which was that, as he was beaten in the
matter of private possessions, he should make gifts to the people from
their own property; and accordingly he instituted pay for the members
of the juries. Some critics accuse him of thereby causing a
deterioration in the character of the juries, since it was always the
common people who put themselves forward for selection as jurors,
rather than the men of better position. Moreover, bribery came into
existence after this, the first person to introduce it being Anytus,
after his command at Pylos.  He was prosecuted by certain individuals
on account of his loss of Pylos, but escaped by bribing the jury.



Part 28

So long, however, as Pericles was leader of the people, things went
tolerably well with the state; but when he was dead there was a great
change for the worse. Then for the first time did the people choose a
leader who was of no reputation among men of good standing, whereas up
to this time such men had always been found as leaders of the
democracy. The first leader of the people, in the very beginning of
things, was Solon, and the second was Pisistratus, both of them men of
birth and position. After the overthrow of the tyrants there was
Cleisthenes, a member of the house of the Alcmeonidae; and he had no
rival opposed to him after the expulsion of the party of Isagoras.
After this Xanthippus was the leader of the people, and Miltiades of
the upper class. Then came Themistocles and Aristides, and after them
Ephialtes as leader of the people, and Cimon son of Miltiades of the
wealthier class. Pericles followed as leader of the people, and
Thucydides, who was connected by marriage with Cimon, of the
opposition. After the death of Pericles, Nicias, who subsequently fell
in Sicily, appeared as leader of the aristocracy, and Cleon son of
Cleaenetus of the people. The latter seems, more than any one else, to
have been the cause of the corruption of the democracy by his wild
undertakings; and he was the first to use unseemly shouting and coarse
abuse on the Bema, and to harangue the people with his cloak girt up
short about him, whereas all his predecessors had spoken decently and
in order. These were succeeded by Theramenes son of Hagnon as leader of
the one party, and the lyre-maker Cleophon of the people. It was
Cleophon who first granted the two-obol donation for the theatrical
performances, and for some time it continued to be given; but then
Callicrates of Paeania ousted him by promising to add a third obol to
the sum. Both of these persons were subsequently condemned to death;
for the people, even if they are deceived for a time, in the end
generally come to detest those who have beguiled them into any unworthy
action. After Cleophon the popular leadership was occupied successively
by the men who chose to talk the biggest and pander the most to the
tastes of the majority, with their eyes fixed only on the interests of
the moment. The best statesmen at Athens, after those of early times,
seem to have been Nicias, Thucydides, and Theramenes. As to Nicias and
Thucydides, nearly every one agrees that they were not merely men of
birth and character, but also statesmen, and that they ruled the state
with paternal care. On the merits of Theramenes opinion is divided,
because it so happened that in his time public affairs were in a very
stormy state. But those who give their opinion deliberately find him,
not, as his critics falsely assert, overthrowing every kind of
constitution, but supporting every kind so long as it did not
transgress laws; thus showing that he was able, as every good citizen
should be, to live under any form of constitution, while he refused to
countenance illegality and was its constant enemy.



Part 29

So long as the fortune of the war continued even, the Athenians
preserved the democracy; but after the disaster in Sicily, when the
Lacedaemonians had gained the upper hand through their alliance with
the king of Persia, they were compelled to abolish the democracy and
establish in its place the constitution of the Four Hundred. The speech
recommending this course before the vote was made by Melobius, and the
motion was proposed by Pythodorus of Anaphlystus; but the real argument
which persuaded the majority was the belief that the king of Persia was
more likely to form an alliance with them if the constitution were on
an oligarchical basis. The motion of Pythodorus was to the following
effect. The popular Assembly was to elect twenty persons, over forty
years of age, who, in conjunction with the existing ten members of the
Committee of Public Safety, after taking an oath that they would frame
such measures as they thought best for the state, should then prepare
proposals for the public safety. In addition, any other person might
make proposals, so that of all the schemes before them the people might
choose the best.  Cleitophon concurred with the motion of Pythodorus,
but moved that the committee should also investigate the ancient laws
enacted by Cleisthenes when he created the democracy, in order that
they might have these too before them and so be in a position to decide
wisely; his suggestion being that the constitution of Cleisthenes was
not really democratic, but closely akin to that of Solon. When the
committee was elected, their first proposal was that the Prytanes
should be compelled to put to the vote any motion that was offered on
behalf of the public safety. Next they abolished all indictments for
illegal proposals, all impeachments and pubic prosecutions, in order
that every Athenian should be free to give his counsel on the
situation, if he chose; and they decreed that if any person imposed a
fine on any other for his acts in this respect, or prosecuted him or
summoned him before the courts, he should, on an information being laid
against him, be summarily arrested and brought before the generals, who
should deliver him to the Eleven to be put to death.  After these
preliminary measures, they drew up the constitution in the following
manner. The revenues of the state were not to be spent on any purpose
except the war. All magistrates should serve without remuneration for
the period of the war, except the nine Archons and the Prytanes for the
time being, who should each receive three obols a day. The whole of the
rest of the administration was to be committed, for the period of the
war, to those Athenians who were most capable of serving the state
personally or pecuniarily, to the number of not less than five
thousand. This body was to have full powers, to the extent even of
making treaties with whomsoever they willed; and ten representatives,
over forty years of age, were to be elected from each tribe to draw up
the list of the Five Thousand, after taking an oath on a full and
perfect sacrifice.



Part 30

These were the recommendations of the committee; and when they had been
ratified the Five Thousand elected from their own number a hundred
commissioners to draw up the constitution. They, on their appointment,
drew up and produced the following recommendations. There should be a
Council, holding office for a year, consisting of men over thirty years
of age, serving without pay. To this body should belong the Generals,
the nine Archons, the Amphictyonic Registrar (Hieromnemon), the
Taxiarchs, the Hipparchs, the Phylarch, the commanders of garrisons,
the Treasurers of Athena and the other gods, ten in number, the
Hellenic Treasurers (Hellenotamiae), the Treasurers of the other
non-sacred moneys, to the number of twenty, the ten Commissioners of
Sacrifices (Hieropoei), and the ten Superintendents of the mysteries.
All these were to be appointed by the Council from a larger number of
selected candidates, chosen from its members for the time being. The
other offices were all to be filled by lot, and not from the members of
the Council. The Hellenic Treasurers who actually administered the
funds should not sit with the Council. As regards the future, four
Councils were to be created, of men of the age already mentioned, and
one of these was to be chosen by lot to take office at once, while the
others were to receive it in turn, in the order decided by the lot. For
this purpose the hundred commissioners were to distribute themselves
and all the rest as equally as possible into four parts, and cast lots
for precedence, and the selected body should hold office for a year.
They were to administer that office as seemed to them best, both with
reference to the safe custody and due expenditure of the finances, and
generally with regard to all other matters to the best of their
ability. If they desired to take a larger number of persons into
counsel, each member might call in one assistant of his own choice,
subject to the same qualification of age. The Council was to sit once
every five days, unless there was any special need for more frequent
sittings. The casting of the lot for the Council was to be held by the
nine Archons; votes on divisions were to be counted by five tellers
chosen by lot from the members of the Council, and of these one was to
be selected by lot every day to act as president. These five persons
were to cast lots for precedence between the parties wishing to appear
before the Council, giving the first place to sacred matters, the
second to heralds, the third to embassies, and the fourth to all other
subjects; but matters concerning the war might be dealt with, on the
motion of the generals, whenever there was need, without balloting.
Any member of the Council who did not enter the Council-house at the
time named should be fined a drachma for each day, unless he was away
on leave of absence from the Council.



Part 31

Such was the constitution which they drew up for the time to come, but
for the immediate present they devised the following scheme. There
should be a Council of Four Hundred, as in the ancient constitution,
forty from each tribe, chosen out of candidates of more than thirty
years of age, selected by the members of the tribes. This Council
should appoint the magistrates and draw up the form of oath which they
were to take; and in all that concerned the laws, in the examination of
official accounts, and in other matters generally, they might act
according to their discretion. They must, however, observe the laws
that might be enacted with reference to the constitution of the state,
and had no power to alter them nor to pass others. The generals should
be provisionally elected from the whole body of the Five Thousand, but
so soon as the Council came into existence it was to hold an
examination of military equipments, and thereon elect ten persons,
together with a secretary, and the persons thus elected should hold
office during the coming year with full powers, and should have the
right, whenever they desired it, of joining in the deliberations of the
Council. The Five thousand was also to elect a single Hipparch and ten
Phylarchs; but for the future the Council was to elect these officers
according to the regulations above laid down. No office, except those
of member of the Council and of general, might be held more than once,
either by the first occupants or by their successors. With reference to
the future distribution of the Four Hundred into the four successive
sections, the hundred commissioners must divide them whenever the time
comes for the citizens to join in the Council along with the rest.



Part 32

The hundred commissioners appointed by the Five Thousand drew up the
constitution as just stated; and after it had been ratified by the
people, under the presidency of Aristomachus, the existing Council,
that of the year of Callias, was dissolved before it had completed its
term of office. It was dissolved on the fourteenth day of the month
Thargelion, and the Four Hundred entered into office on the
twenty-first; whereas the regular Council, elected by lot, ought to
have entered into office on the fourteenth of Scirophorion. Thus was
the oligarchy established, in the archonship of Callias, just about a
hundred years after the expulsion of the tyrants. The chief promoters
of the revolution were Pisander, Antiphon, and Theramenes, all of them
men of good birth and with high reputations for ability and judgement.
When, however, this constitution had been established, the Five
Thousand were only nominally selected, and the Four Hundred, together
with the ten officers on whom full powers had been conferred, occupied
the Council-house and really administered the government. They began by
sending ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians proposing a cessation of the
war on the basis of the existing position; but as the Lacedaemonians
refused to listen to them unless they would also abandon the command of
the sea, they broke off the negotiations.



Part 33

For about four months the constitution of the Four Hundred lasted, and
Mnasilochus held office as Archon of their nomination for two months of
the year of Theopompus, who was Archon for the remaining ten. On the
loss of the naval battle of Eretria, however, and the revolt of the
whole of Euboea except Oreum, the indignation of the people was greater
than at any of the earlier disasters, since they drew far more supplies
at this time from Euboea than from Attica itself. Accordingly they
deposed the Four Hundred and committed the management of affairs to the
Five Thousand, consisting of persons possessing a military equipment.
At the same time they voted that pay should not be given for any public
office. The persons chiefly responsible for the revolution were
Aristocrates and Theramenes, who disapproved of the action of the Four
Hundred in retaining the direction of affairs entirely in their own
hands, and referring nothing to the Five Thousand. During this period
the constitution of the state seems to have been admirable, since it
was a time of war and the franchise was in the hands of those who
possessed a military equipment.



Part 34

The people, however, in a very short time deprived the Five Thousand of
their monopoly of the government. Then, six years after the overthrow
of the Four Hundred, in the archonship of Callias of Angele, the battle
of Arginusae took place, of which the results were, first, that the ten
generals who had gained the victory were all condemned by a single
decision, owing to the people being led astray by persons who aroused
their indignation; though, as a matter of fact, some of the generals
had actually taken no part in the battle, and others were themselves
picked up by other vessels. Secondly, when the Lacedaemonians proposed
to evacuate Decelea and make peace on the basis of the existing
position, although some of the Athenians supported this proposal, the
majority refused to listen to them. In this they were led astray by
Cleophon, who appeared in the Assembly drunk and wearing his
breastplate, and prevented peace being made, declaring that he would
never accept peace unless the Lacedaemonians abandoned their claims on
all the cities allied with them. They mismanaged their opportunity
then, and in a very short time they learnt their mistake. The next
year, in the archonship of Alexias, they suffered the disaster of
Aegospotami, the consequence of which was that Lysander became master
of the city, and set up the Thirty as its governors. He did so in the
following manner. One of the terms of peace stipulated that the state
should be governed according to 'the ancient constitution'. Accordingly
the popular party tried to preserve the democracy, while that part of
the upper class which belonged to the political clubs, together with
the exiles who had returned since the peace, aimed at an oligarchy, and
those who were not members of any club, though in other respects they
considered themselves as good as any other citizens, were anxious to
restore the ancient constitution. The latter class included Archinus,
Anytus, Cleitophon, Phormisius, and many others, but their most
prominent leader was Theramenes. Lysander, however, threw his influence
on the side of the oligarchical party, and the popular Assembly was
compelled by sheer intimidation to pass a vote establishing the
oligarchy. The motion to this effect was proposed by Dracontides of
Aphidna.



Part 35

In this way were the Thirty established in power, in the archonship of
Pythodorus. As soon, however, as they were masters of the city, they
ignored all the resolutions which had been passed relating to the
organization of the constitution, but after appointing a Council of
Five Hundred and the other magistrates out of a thousand selected
candidates, and associating with themselves ten Archons in Piraeus,
eleven superintendents of the prison, and three hundred 'lash-bearers'
as attendants, with the help of these they kept the city under their
own control. At first, indeed, they behaved with moderation towards the
citizens and pretended to administer the state according to the ancient
constitution. In pursuance of this policy they took down from the hill
of Areopagus the laws of Ephialtes and Archestratus relating to the
Areopagite Council; they also repealed such of the statutes of Solon as
were obscure, and abolished the supreme power of the law-courts. In
this they claimed to be restoring the constitution and freeing it from
obscurities; as, for instance, by making the testator free once for all
to leave his property as he pleased, and abolishing the existing
limitations in cases of insanity, old age, and undue female influence,
in order that no opening might be left for professional accusers. In
other matters also their conduct was similar. At first, then, they
acted on these lines, and they destroyed the professional accusers and
those mischievous and evil-minded persons who, to the great detriment
of the democracy, had attached themselves to it in order to curry
favour with it. With all of this the city was much pleased, and thought
that the Thirty were doing it with the best of motives. But so soon as
they had got a firmer hold on the city, they spared no class of
citizens, but put to death any persons who were eminent for wealth or
birth or character. Herein they aimed at removing all whom they had
reason to fear, while they also wished to lay hands on their
possessions; and in a short time they put to death not less than
fifteen hundred persons.



Part 36

Theramenes, however, seeing the city thus falling into ruin, was
displeased with their proceedings, and counselled them to cease such
unprincipled conduct and let the better classes have a share in the
government. At first they resisted his advice, but when his proposals
came to be known abroad, and the masses began to associate themselves
with him, they were seized with alarm lest he should make himself the
leader of the people and destroy their despotic power.  Accordingly
they drew up a list of three thousand citizens, to whom they announced
that they would give a share in the constitution.  Theramenes, however,
criticized this scheme also, first on the ground that, while proposing
to give all respectable citizens a share in the constitution, they were
actually giving it only to three thousand persons, as though all merit
were confined within that number; and secondly because they were doing
two inconsistent things, since they made the government rest on the
basis of force, and yet made the governors inferior in strength to the
governed.  However, they took no notice of his criticisms, and for a
long time put off the publication of the list of the Three Thousand and
kept to themselves the names of those who had been placed upon it; and
every time they did decide to publish it they proceeded to strike out
some of those who had been included in it, and insert others who had
been omitted.



Part 37

Now when winter had set in, Thrasybulus and the exiles occupied Phyle,
and the force which the Thirty led out to attack them met with a
reverse. Thereupon the Thirty decided to disarm the bulk of the
population and to get rid of Theramenes; which they did in the
following way. They introduced two laws into the Council, which they
commanded it to pass; the first of them gave the Thirty absolute power
to put to death any citizen who was not included in the list of the
Three Thousand, while the second disqualified all persons from
participation in the franchise who should have assisted in the
demolition of the fort of Eetioneia, or have acted in any way against
the Four Hundred who had organized the previous oligarchy.  Theramenes
had done both, and accordingly, when these laws were ratified, he
became excluded from the franchise and the Thirty had full power to put
him to death. Theramenes having been thus removed, they disarmed all
the people except the Three Thousand, and in every respect showed a
great advance in cruelty and crime. They also sent ambassadors to
Lacedaemonian to blacken the character of Theramenes and to ask for
help; and the Lacedaemonians, in answer to their appeal, sent Callibius
as military governor with about seven hundred troops, who came and
occupied the Acropolis.



Part 38

These events were followed by the occupation of Munichia by the exiles
from Phyle, and their victory over the Thirty and their partisans.
After the fight the party of the city retreated, and next day they held
a meeting in the marketplace and deposed the Thirty, and elected ten
citizens with full powers to bring the war to a termination. When,
however, the Ten had taken over the government they did nothing towards
the object for which they were elected, but sent envoys to
Lacedaemonian to ask for help and to borrow money.  Further, finding
that the citizens who possessed the franchise were displeased at their
proceedings, they were afraid lest they should be deposed, and
consequently, in order to strike terror into them (in which design they
succeeded), they arrested Demaretus, one of the most eminent citizens,
and put him to death. This gave them a firm hold on the government, and
they also had the support of Callibius and his Peloponnesians, together
with several of the Knights; for some of the members of this class were
the most zealous among the citizens to prevent the return of the exiles
from Phyle. When, however, the party in Piraeus and Munichia began to
gain the upper hand in the war, through the defection of the whole
populace to them, the party in the city deposed the original Ten, and
elected another Ten, consisting of men of the highest repute. Under
their administration, and with their active and zealous cooperation,
the treaty of reconciliation was made and the populace returned to the
city. The most prominent members of this board were Rhinon of Paeania
and Phayllus of Acherdus, who, even before the arrival of Pausanias,
opened negotiations with the party in Piraeus, and after his arrival
seconded his efforts to bring about the return of the exiles. For it
was Pausanias, the king of the Lacedaemonians, who brought the peace
and reconciliation to a fulfillment, in conjunction with the ten
commissioners of arbitration who arrived later from Lacedaemonian, at
his own earnest request. Rhinon and his colleagues received a vote of
thanks for the goodwill shown by them to the people, and though they
received their charge under an oligarchy and handed in their accounts
under a democracy, no one, either of the party that had stayed in the
city or of the exiles that had returned from the Piraeus, brought any
complaint against them. On the contrary, Rhinon was immediately elected
general on account of his conduct in this office.



Part 39

This reconciliation was effected in the archonship of Eucleides, on the
following terms. All persons who, having remained in the city during
the troubles, were now anxious to leave it, were to be free to settle
at Eleusis, retaining their civil rights and possessing full and
independent powers of self-government, and with the free enjoyment of
their own personal property. The temple at Eleusis should be common
ground for both parties, and should be under the superintendence of the
Ceryces, and the Eumolpidae, according to primitive custom. The
settlers at Eleusis should not be allowed to enter Athens, nor the
people of Athens to enter Eleusis, except at the season of the
mysteries, when both parties should be free from these restrictions.
The secessionists should pay their share to the fund for the common
defence out of their revenues, just like all the other Athenians. If
any of the seceding party wished to take a house in Eleusis, the people
would help them to obtain the consent of the owner; but if they could
not come to terms, they should appoint three valuers on either side,
and the owner should receive whatever price they should appoint.  Of
the inhabitants of Eleusis, those whom the secessionists wished to
remain should be allowed to do so. The list of those who desired to
secede should be made up within ten days after the taking of the oaths
in the case of persons already in the country, and their actual
departure should take place within twenty days; persons at present out
of the country should have the same terms allowed to them after their
return. No one who settled at Eleusis should be capable of holding any
office in Athens until he should again register himself on the roll as
a resident in the city. Trials for homicide, including all cases in
which one party had either killed or wounded another, should be
conducted according to ancestral practice. There should be a general
amnesty concerning past events towards all persons except the Thirty,
the Ten, the Eleven, and the magistrates in Piraeus; and these too
should be included if they should submit their accounts in the usual
way. Such accounts should be given by the magistrates in Piraeus before
a court of citizens rated in Piraeus, and by the magistrates in the
city before a court of those rated in the city.  On these terms those
who wished to do so might secede. Each party was to repay separately
the money which it had borrowed for the war.



Part 40

When the reconciliation had taken place on these terms, those who had
fought on the side of the Thirty felt considerable apprehensions, and a
large number intended to secede. But as they put off entering their
names till the last moment, as people will do, Archinus, observing
their numbers, and being anxious to retain them as citizens, cut off
the remaining days during which the list should have remained open; and
in this way many persons were compelled to remain, though they did so
very unwillingly until they recovered confidence. This is one point in
which Archinus appears to have acted in a most statesmanlike manner,
and another was his subsequent prosecution of Thrasybulus on the charge
of illegality, for a motion by which he proposed to confer the
franchise on all who had taken part in the return from Piraeus,
although some of them were notoriously slaves. And yet a third such
action was when one of the returned exiles began to violate the
amnesty, whereupon Archinus haled him to the Council and persuaded them
to execute him without trial, telling them that now they would have to
show whether they wished to preserve the democracy and abide by the
oaths they had taken; for if they let this man escape they would
encourage others to imitate him, while if they executed him they would
make an example for all to learn by. And this was exactly what
happened; for after this man had been put to death no one ever again
broke the amnesty. On the contrary, the Athenians seem, both in public
and in private, to have behaved in the most unprecedentedly admirable
and public-spirited way with reference to the preceding troubles. Not
only did they blot out all memory of former offences, but they even
repaid to the Lacedaemonians out of the public purse the money which
the Thirty had borrowed for the war, although the treaty required each
party, the party of the city and the party of Piraeus, to pay its own
debts separately. This they did because they thought it was a necessary
first step in the direction of restoring harmony; but in other states,
so far from the democratic parties making advances from their own
possessions, they are rather in the habit of making a general
redistribution of the land. A final reconciliation was made with the
secessionists at Eleusis two years after the secession, in the
archonship of Xenaenetus.



Part 41

This, however, took place at a later date; at the time of which we are
speaking the people, having secured the control of the state,
established the constitution which exists at the present day.
Pythodorus was Archon at the time, but the democracy seems to have
assumed the supreme power with perfect justice, since it had effected
its own return by its own exertions. This was the eleventh change which
had taken place in the constitution of Athens. The first modification
of the primaeval condition of things was when Ion and his companions
brought the people together into a community, for then the people was
first divided into the four tribes, and the tribe-kings were created.
Next, and first after this, having now some semblance of a
constitution, was that which took place in the reign of Theseus,
consisting in a slight deviation from absolute monarchy. After this
came the constitution formed under Draco, when the first code of laws
was drawn up. The third was that which followed the civil war, in the
time of Solon; from this the democracy took its rise. The fourth was
the tyranny of Pisistratus; the fifth the constitution of Cleisthenes,
after the overthrow of the tyrants, of a more democratic character than
that of Solon. The sixth was that which followed on the Persian wars,
when the Council of Areopagus had the direction of the state. The
seventh, succeeding this, was the constitution which Aristides sketched
out, and which Ephialtes brought to completion by overthrowing the
Areopagite Council; under this the nation, misled by the demagogues,
made the most serious mistakes in the interest of its maritime empire.
The eighth was the establishment of the Four Hundred, followed by the
ninth, the restored democracy. The tenth was the tyranny of the Thirty
and the Ten. The eleventh was that which followed the return from Phyle
and Piraeus; and this has continued from that day to this, with
continual accretions of power to the masses. The democracy has made
itself master of everything and administers everything by its votes in
the Assembly and by the law-courts, in which it holds the supreme
power.  Even the jurisdiction of the Council has passed into the hands
of the people at large; and this appears to be a judicious change,
since small bodies are more open to corruption, whether by actual money
or influence, than large ones. At first they refused to allow payment
for attendance at the Assembly; but the result was that people did not
attend. Consequently, after the Prytanes had tried many devices in vain
in order to induce the populace to come and ratify the votes,
Agyrrhius, in the first instance, made a provision of one obol a day,
which Heracleides of Clazomenae, nicknamed 'the king', increased to two
obols, and Agyrrhius again to three.



Part 42

The present state of the constitution is as follows. The franchise is
open to all who are of citizen birth by both parents. They are enrolled
among the demesmen at the age of eighteen. On the occasion of their
enrollment the demesmen give their votes on oath, first whether the
candidates appear to be of the age prescribed by the law (if not, they
are dismissed back into the ranks of the boys), and secondly whether
the candidate is free born and of such parentage as the laws require.
Then if they decide that he is not a free man, he appeals to the
law-courts, and the demesmen appoint five of their own number to act as
accusers; if the court decides that he has no right to be enrolled, he
is sold by the state as a slave, but if he wins his case he has a right
to be enrolled among the demesmen without further question. After this
the Council examines those who have been enrolled, and if it comes to
the conclusion that any of them is less than eighteen years of age, it
fines the demesmen who enrolled him. When the youths (Ephebi) have
passed this examination, their fathers meet by their tribes, and
appoint on oath three of their fellow tribesmen, over forty years of
age, who, in their opinion, are the best and most suitable persons to
have charge of the youths; and of these the Assembly elects one from
each tribe as guardian, together with a director, chosen from the
general body of Athenians, to control the while. Under the charge of
these persons the youths first of all make the circuit of the temples;
then they proceed to Piraeus, and some of them garrison Munichia and
some the south shore. The Assembly also elects two trainers, with
subordinate instructors, who teach them to fight in heavy armour, to
use the bow and javelin, and to discharge a catapult. The guardians
receive from the state a drachma apiece for their keep, and the youths
four obols apiece. Each guardian receives the allowance for all the
members of his tribe and buys the necessary provisions for the common
stock (they mess together by tribes), and generally superintends
everything. In this way they spend the first year. The next year, after
giving a public display of their military evolutions, on the occasion
when the Assembly meets in the theatre, they receive a shield and spear
from the state; after which they patrol the country and spend their
time in the forts. For these two years they are on garrison duty, and
wear the military cloak, and during this time they are exempt from all
taxes. They also can neither bring an action at law, nor have one
brought against them, in order that they may have no excuse for
requiring leave of absence; though exception is made in cases of
actions concerning inheritances and wards of state, or of any
sacrificial ceremony connected with the family. When the two years have
elapsed they thereupon take their position among the other citizens.
Such is the manner of the enrollment of the citizens and the training
of the youths.



Part 43

All the magistrates that are concerned with the ordinary routine of
administration are elected by lot, except the Military Treasurer, the
Commissioners of the Theoric fund, and the Superintendent of Springs.
These are elected by vote, and hold office from one Panathenaic
festival to the next. All military officers are also elected by vote.

 The Council of Five Hundred is elected by lot, fifty from each
tribe. Each tribe holds the office of Prytanes in turn, the order being
determined by lot; the first four serve for thirty-six days each, the
last six for thirty-five, since the reckoning is by lunar years. The
Prytanes for the time being, in the first place, mess together in the
Tholus, and receive a sum of money from the state for their
maintenance; and, secondly, they convene the meetings of the Council
and the Assembly. The Council they convene every day, unless it is a
holiday, the Assembly four times in each prytany. It is also their duty
to draw up the programme of the business of the Council and to decide
what subjects are to be dealt with on each particular day, and where the
sitting is to be held. They also draw up the programme for the meetings
of the Assembly. One of these in each prytany is called the 'sovereign'
Assembly; in this the people have to ratify the continuance of the
magistrates in office, if they are performing their duties properly,
and to consider the supply of corn and the defence of the country. On
this day, too, impeachments are introduced by those who wish to do so,
the lists of property confiscated by the state are read, and also
applications for inheritances and wards of state, so that nothing may
pass unclaimed without the cognizance of any person concerned. In the
sixth prytany, in addition to the business already stated, the question
is put to the vote whether it is desirable to hold a vote of ostracism
or not; and complaints against professional accusers, whether Athenian
or aliens domiciled in Athens, are received, to the number of not more
than three of either class, together with cases in which an individual
has made some promise to the people and has not performed it. Another
Assembly in each prytany is assigned to the hearing of petitions, and
at this meeting any one is free, on depositing the petitioner's
olive-branch, to speak to the people concerning any matter, public or
private. The two remaining meetings are devoted to all other subjects,
and the laws require them to deal with three questions connected with
religion, three connected with heralds and embassies, and three on
secular subjects. Sometimes questions are brought forward without a
preliminary vote of the Assembly to take them into consideration.

Heralds and envoys appear first before the Prytanes, and the bearers of
dispatches also deliver them to the same officials.



Part 44

There is a single President of the Prytanes, elected by lot, who
presides for a night and a day; he may not hold the office for more
than that time, nor may the same individual hold it twice. He keeps the
keys of the sanctuaries in which the treasures and public records of
the state are preserved, and also the public seal; and he is bound to
remain in the Tholus, together with one-third of the Prytanes, named by
himself. Whenever the Prytanes convene a meeting of the Council or
Assembly, he appoints by lot nine Proedri, one from each tribe except
that which holds the office of Prytanes for the time being; and out of
these nine he similarly appoints one as President, and hands over the
programme for the meeting to them. They take it and see to the
preservation of order, put forward the various subjects which are to be
considered, decide the results of the votings, and direct the
proceedings generally. They also have power to dismiss the meeting. No
one may act as President more than once in the year, but he may be a
Proedrus once in each prytany.

Elections to the offices of General and Hipparch and all other military
commands are held in the Assembly, in such manner as the people decide;
they are held after the sixth prytany by the first board of Prytanes in
whose term of office the omens are favourable.  There has, however, to
be a preliminary consideration by the Council in this case also.



Part 45

In former times the Council had full powers to inflict fines and
imprisonment and death; but when it had consigned Lysimachus to the
executioner, and he was sitting in the immediate expectation of death,
Eumelides of Alopece rescued him from its hands, maintaining that no
citizen ought to be put to death except on the decision of a court of
law. Accordingly a trial was held in a law-court, and Lysimachus was
acquitted, receiving henceforth the nickname of 'the man from the
drum-head'; and the people deprived the Council thenceforward of the
power to inflict death or imprisonment or fine, passing a law that if
the Council condemn any person for an offence or inflict a fine, the
Thesmothetae shall bring the sentence or fine before the law-court, and
the decision of the jurors shall be the final judgement in the matter.

The Council passes judgement on nearly all magistrates, especially
those who have the control of money; its judgement, however, is not
final, but is subject to an appeal to the lawcourts. Private
individuals, also, may lay an information against any magistrate they
please for not obeying the laws, but here too there is an appeal to the
law-courts if the Council declare the charge proved. The Council also
examines those who are to be its members for the ensuing year, and
likewise the nine Archons. Formerly the Council had full power to
reject candidates for office as unsuitable, but now they have an appeal
to the law-courts. In all these matters, therefore, the Council has no
final jurisdiction. It takes, however, preliminary cognizance of all
matters brought before the Assembly, and the Assembly cannot vote on
any question unless it has first been considered by the Council and
placed on the programme by the Prytanes; since a person who carries a
motion in the Assembly is liable to an action for illegal proposal on
these grounds.



Part 46

The Council also superintends the triremes that are already in
existence, with their tackle and sheds, and builds new triremes or
quadriremes, whichever the Assembly votes, with tackle and sheds to
match. The Assembly appoints master-builders for the ships by vote; and
if they do not hand them over completed to the next Council, the old
Council cannot receive the customary donation--that being normally
given to it during its successor's term of office. For the building of
the triremes it appoints ten commissioners, chosen from its own
members. The Council also inspects all public buildings, and if it is
of opinion that the state is being defrauded, it reports the culprit to
the Assembly, and on condemnation hands him over to the law-courts.



Part 47

The Council also co-operates with other magistrates in most of their
duties. First there are the treasurers of Athena, ten in number,
elected by lot, one from each tribe. According to the law of
Solon--which is still in force--they must be Pentacosiomedimni, but in
point of fact the person on whom the lot falls holds the office even
though he be quite a poor man. These officers take over charge of the
statue of Athena, the figures of Victory, and all the other ornaments
of the temple, together with the money, in the presence of the Council.
Then there are the Commissioners for Public Contracts (Poletae), ten in
number, one chosen by lot from each tribe, who farm out the public
contracts. They lease the mines and taxes, in conjunction with the
Military Treasurer and the Commissioners of the Theoric fund, in the
presence of the Council, and grant, to the persons indicated by the
vote of the Council, the mines which are let out by the state,
including both the workable ones, which are let for three years, and
those which are let under special agreements years. They also sell, in
the presence of the Council, the property of those who have gone into
exile from the court of the Areopagus, and of others whose goods have
been confiscated, and the nine Archons ratify the contracts. They also
hand over to the Council lists of the taxes which are farmed out for
the year, entering on whitened tablets the name of the lessee and the
amount paid. They make separate lists, first of those who have to pay
their instalments in each prytany, on ten several tablets, next of
those who pay thrice in the year, with a separate tablet for each
instalment, and finally of those who pay in the ninth prytany. They
also draw up a list of farms and dwellings which have been confiscated
and sold by order of the courts; for these too come within their
province. In the case of dwellings the value must be paid up in five
years, and in that of farms, in ten. The instalments are paid in the
ninth prytany. Further, the King-archon brings before the Council the
leases of the sacred enclosures, written on whitened tablets. These too
are leased for ten years, and the instalments are paid in the prytany;
consequently it is in this prytany that the greatest amount of money is
collected. The tablets containing the lists of the instalments are
carried into the Council, and the public clerk takes charge of them.
Whenever a payment of instalments is to be made he takes from the
pigeon-holes the precise list of the sums which are to be paid and
struck off on that day, and delivers it to the Receivers-General.  The
rest are kept apart, in order that no sum may be struck off before it
is paid.



Part 48

There are ten Receivers-General (Apodectae), elected by lot, one from
each tribe. These officers receive the tablets, and strike off the
instalments as they are paid, in the presence of the Council in the
Council-chamber, and give the tablets back to the public clerk. If any
one fails to pay his instalment, a note is made of it on the tablet;
and he is bound to pay double the amount of the deficiency, or, in
default, to be imprisoned. The Council has full power by the laws to
exact these payments and to inflict this imprisonment. They receive all
the instalments, therefore, on one day, and portion the money out among
the magistrates; and on the next day they bring up the report of the
apportionment, written on a wooden notice-board, and read it out in the
Council-chamber, after which they ask publicly in the Council whether
any one knows of any malpractice in reference to the apportionment, on
the part of either a magistrate or a private individual, and if any one
is charged with malpractice they take a vote on it.

The Council also elects ten Auditors (Logistae) by lot from its own
members, to audit the accounts of the magistrates for each prytany.
They also elect one Examiner of Accounts (Euthunus) by lot from each
tribe, with two assessors (Paredri) for each examiner, whose duty it is
to sit at the ordinary market hours, each opposite the statue of the
eponymous hero of his tribe; and if any one wishes to prefer a charge,
on either public or private grounds, against any magistrate who has
passed his audit before the law-courts, within three days of his having
so passed, he enters on a whitened tablet his own name and that of the
magistrate prosecuted, together with the malpractice that is alleged
against him. He also appends his claim for a penalty of such amount as
seems to him fitting, and gives in the record to the Examiner. The
latter takes it, and if after reading it he considers it proved he
hands it over, if a private case, to the local justices who introduce
cases for the tribe concerned, while if it is a public case he enters
it on the register of the Thesmothetae. Then, if the Thesmothetae
accept it, they bring the accounts of this magistrate once more before
the law-court, and the decision of the jury stands as the final
judgement.



Part 49

The Council also inspects the horses belonging to the state. If a man
who has a good horse is found to keep it in bad condition, he is
mulcted in his allowance of corn; while those which cannot keep up or
which shy and will not stand steady, it brands with a wheel on the jaw,
and the horse so marked is disqualified for service. It also inspects
those who appear to be fit for service as scouts, and any one whom it
rejects is deprived of his horse. It also examines the infantry who
serve among the cavalry, and any one whom it rejects ceases to receive
his pay. The roll of the cavalry is drawn up by the Commissioners of
Enrolment (Catalogeis), ten in number, elected by the Assembly by open
vote. They hand over to the Hipparchs and Phylarchs the list of those
whom they have enrolled, and these officers take it and bring it up
before the Council, and there open the sealed tablet containing the
names of the cavalry. If any of those who have been on the roll
previously make affidavit that they are physically incapable of cavalry
service, they strike them out; then they call up the persons newly
enrolled, and if any one makes affidavit that he is either physically
or pecuniarily incapable of cavalry service they dismiss him, but if no
such affidavit is made the Council vote whether the individual in
question is suitable for the purpose or not. If they vote in the
affirmative his name is entered on the tablet; if not, he is dismissed
with the others.

Formerly the Council used to decide on the plans for public buildings
and the contract for making the robe of Athena; but now this work is
done by a jury in the law-courts appointed by lot, since the Council
was considered to have shown favouritism in its decisions. The Council
also shares with the Military Treasurer the superintendence of the
manufacture of the images of Victory and the prizes at the Panathenaic
festival.

The Council also examines infirm paupers; for there is a law which
provides that persons possessing less than three minas, who are so
crippled as to be unable to do any work, are, after examination by the
Council, to receive two obols a day from the state for their support. A
treasurer is appointed by lot to attend to them.

The Council also, speaking broadly, cooperates in most of the duties of
all the other magistrates; and this ends the list of the functions of
that body.

Part 50

There are ten Commissioners for Repairs of Temples, elected by lot, who
receive a sum of thirty minas from the Receivers-General, and therewith
carry out the most necessary repairs in the temples.

There are also ten City Commissioners (Astynomi), of whom five hold
office in Piraeus and five in the city. Their duty is to see that
female flute- and harp- and lute-players are not hired at more than two
drachmas, and if more than one person is anxious to hire the same girl,
they cast lots and hire her out to the person to whom the lot falls.
They also provide that no collector of sewage shall shoot any of his
sewage within ten stradia of the walls; they prevent people from
blocking up the streets by building, or stretching barriers across
them, or making drain-pipes in mid-air with a discharge into the
street, or having doors which open outwards; they also remove the
corpses of those who die in the streets, for which purpose they have a
body of state slaves assigned to them.



Part 51

Market Commissioners (Agoranomi) are elected by lot, five for Piraeus,
five for the city. Their statutory duty is to see that all articles
offered for sale in the market are pure and unadulterated.

Commissioners of Weights and Measures (Metronomi) are elected by lot,
five for the city, and five for Piraeus. They see that sellers use fair
weights and measures.

Formerly there were ten Corn Commissioners (Sitophylaces), elected by
lot, five for Piraeus, and five for the city; but now there are twenty
for the city and fifteen for Piraeus. Their duties are, first, to see
that the unprepared corn in the market is offered for sale at
reasonable prices, and secondly, to see that the millers sell barley
meal at a price proportionate to that of barley, and that the bakers
sell their loaves at a price proportionate to that of wheat, and of
such weight as the Commissioners may appoint; for the law requires them
to fix the standard weight.

There are ten Superintendents of the Mart, elected by lot, whose duty
is to superintend the Mart, and to compel merchants to bring up into
the city two-thirds of the corn which is brought by sea to the Corn
Mart.



Part 52

The Eleven also are appointed by lot to take care of the prisoners in
the state gaol. Thieves, kidnappers, and pickpockets are brought to
them, and if they plead guilty they are executed, but if they deny the
charge the Eleven bring the case before the law-courts; if the
prisoners are acquitted, they release them, but if not, they then
execute them. They also bring up before the law-courts the list of
farms and houses claimed as state-property; and if it is decided that
they are so, they deliver them to the Commissioners for Public
Contracts. The Eleven also bring up informations laid against
magistrates alleged to be disqualified; this function comes within
their province, but some such cases are brought up by the Thesmothetae.

There are also five Introducers of Cases (Eisagogeis), elected by lot,
one for each pair of tribes, who bring up the 'monthly' cases to the
law-courts. 'Monthly' cases are these: refusal to pay up a dowry where
a party is bound to do so, refusal to pay interest on money borrowed at
12 per cent., or where a man desirous of setting up business in the
market has borrowed from another man capital to start with; also cases
of slander, cases arising out of friendly loans or partnerships, and
cases concerned with slaves, cattle, and the office of trierarch, or
with banks. These are brought up as 'monthly' cases and are introduced
by these officers; but the Receivers-General perform the same function
in cases for or against the farmers of taxes. Those in which the sum
concerned is not more than ten drachmas they can decide summarily, but
all above that amount they bring into the law-courts as 'monthly' cases.



Part 53

The Forty are also elected by lot, four from each tribe, before whom
suitors bring all other cases. Formerly they were thirty in number, and
they went on circuit through the demes to hear causes; but after the
oligarchy of the Thirty they were increased to forty. They have full
powers to decide cases in which the amount at issue does not exceed ten
drachmas, but anything beyond that value they hand over to the
Arbitrators. The Arbitrators take up the case, and, if they cannot
bring the parties to an agreement, they give a decision. If their
decision satisfies both parties, and they abide by it, the case is at
an end; but if either of the parties appeals to the law-courts, the
Arbitrators enclose the evidence, the pleadings, and the laws quoted in
the case in two urns, those of the plaintiff in the one, and those of
the defendant in the other. These they seal up and, having attached to
them the decision of the arbitrator, written out on a tablet, place
them in the custody of the four justices whose function it is to
introduce cases on behalf of the tribe of the defendant. These officers
take them and bring up the case before the law-court, to a jury of two
hundred and one members in cases up to the value of a thousand
drachmas, or to one of four hundred and one in cases above that value.
No laws or pleadings or evidence may be used except those which were
adduced before the Arbitrator, and have been enclosed in the urns.

The Arbitrators are persons in the sixtieth year of their age; this
appears from the schedule of the Archons and the Eponymi. There are two
classes of Eponymi, the ten who give their names to the tribes, and the
forty-two of the years of service. The youths, on being enrolled among
the citizens, were formerly registered upon whitened tablets, and the
names were appended of the Archon in whose year they were enrolled, and
of the Eponymus who had been in course in the preceding year; at the
present day they are written on a bronze pillar, which stands in front
of the Council-chamber, near the Eponymi of the tribes. Then the Forty
take the last of the Eponymi of the years of service, and assign the
arbitrations to the persons belonging to that year, casting lots to
determine which arbitrations each shall undertake; and every one is
compelled to carry through the arbitrations which the lot assigns to
him. The law enacts that any one who does not serve as Arbitrator when
he has arrived at the necessary age shall lose his civil rights, unless
he happens to be holding some other office during that year, or to be
out of the country. These are the only persons who escape the duty. Any
one who suffers injustice at the hands of the Arbitrator may appeal to
the whole board of Arbitrators, and if they find the magistrate guilty,
the law enacts that he shall lose his civil rights. The persons thus
condemned have, however, in their turn an appeal. The Eponymi are also
used in reference to military expeditions; when the men of military age
are despatched on service, a notice is put up stating that the men from
such-and-such an Archon and Eponymus to such-and-such another Archon
and Eponymus are to go on the expedition.



Part 54

The following magistrates also are elected by lot: Five Commissioners
of Roads (Hodopoei), who, with an assigned body of public slaves, are
required to keep the roads in order: and ten Auditors, with ten
assistants, to whom all persons who have held any office must give in
their accounts. These are the only officers who audit the accounts of
those who are subject to examination, and who bring them up for
examination before the law-courts. If they detect any magistrate in
embezzlement, the jury condemn him for theft, and he is obliged to
repay tenfold the sum he is declared to have misappropriated. If they
charge a magistrate with accepting bribes and the jury convict him,
they fine him for corruption, and this sum too is repaid tenfold. Or if
they convict him of unfair dealing, he is fined on that charge, and the
sum assessed is paid without increase, if payment is made before the
ninth prytany, but otherwise it is doubled. A tenfold fine is not
doubled.

The Clerk of the prytany, as he is called, is also elected by lot.  He
has the charge of all public documents, and keeps the resolutions which
are passed by the Assembly, and checks the transcripts of all other
official papers and attends at the sessions of the Council.  Formerly
he was elected by open vote, and the most distinguished and trustworthy
persons were elected to the post, as is known from the fact that the
name of this officer is appended on the pillars recording treaties of
alliance and grants of consulship and citizenship. Now, however, he is
elected by lot. There is, in addition, a Clerk of the Laws, elected by
lot, who attends at the sessions of the Council; and he too checks the
transcript of all the laws. The Assembly also elects by open vote a
clerk to read documents to it and to the Council; but he has no other
duty except that of reading aloud.

The Assembly also elects by lot the Commissioners of Public Worship
(Hieropoei) known as the Commissioners for Sacrifices, who offer the
sacrifices appointed by oracle, and, in conjunction with the seers,
take the auspices whenever there is occasion. It also elects by lot ten
others, known as Annual Commissioners, who offer certain sacrifices and
administer all the quadrennial festivals except the Panathenaea. There
are the following quadrennial festivals: first that of Delos (where
there is also a sexennial festival), secondly the Brauronia, thirdly
the Heracleia, fourthly the Eleusinia, and fifthly the Panathenaea; and
no two of these are celebrated in the same place. To these the
Hephaestia has now been added, in the archonship of Cephisophon.

An Archon is also elected by lot for Salamis, and a Demarch for
Piraeus. These officers celebrate the Dionysia in these two places, and
appoint Choregi. In Salamis, moreover, the name of the Archon is
publicly recorded.



Part 55

All the foregoing magistrates are elected by lot, and their powers are
those which have been stated. To pass on to the nine Archons, as they
are called, the manner of their appointment from the earliest times has
been described already. At the present day six Thesmothetae are elected
by lot, together with their clerk, and in addition to these an Archon,
a King, and a Polemarch. One is elected from each tribe. They are
examined first of all by the Council of Five Hundred, with the
exception of the clerk. The latter is examined only in the lawcourt,
like other magistrates (for all magistrates, whether elected by lot or
by open vote, are examined before entering on their offices); but the
nine Archons are examined both in the Council and again in the
law-court. Formerly no one could hold the office if the Council
rejected him, but now there is an appeal to the law-court, which is the
final authority in the matter of the examination. When they are
examined, they are asked, first, 'Who is your father, and of what deme?
who is your father's father? who is your mother? who is your mother's
father, and of what deme?' Then the candidate is asked whether he
possesses an ancestral Apollo and a household Zeus, and where their
sanctuaries are; next if he possesses a family tomb, and where; then if
he treats his parents well, and pays his taxes, and has served on the
required military expeditions. When the examiner has put these
questions, he proceeds, 'Call the witnesses to these facts'; and when
the candidate has produced his witnesses, he next asks, 'Does any one
wish to make any accusation against this man?' If an accuser appears,
he gives the parties an opportunity of making their accusation and
defence, and then puts it to the Council to pass the candidate or not,
and to the law-court to give the final vote. If no one wishes to make
an accusation, he proceeds at once to the vote. Formerly a single
individual gave the vote, but now all the members are obliged to vote
on the candidates, so that if any unprincipled candidate has managed to
get rid of his accusers, it may still be possible for him to be
disqualified before the law-court. When the examination has been thus
completed, they proceed to the stone on which are the pieces of the
victims, and on which the Arbitrators take oath before declaring their
decisions, and witnesses swear to their testimony. On this stone the
Archons stand, and swear to execute their office uprightly and
according to the laws, and not to receive presents in respect of the
performance of their duties, or, if they do, to dedicate a golden
statue. When they have taken this oath they proceed to the Acropolis,
and there they repeat it; after this they enter upon their office.



Part 56

The Archon, the King, and the Polemarch have each two assessors,
nominated by themselves. These officers are examined in the lawcourt
before they begin to act, and give in accounts on each occasion of
their acting.

As soon as the Archon enters office, he begins by issuing a
proclamation that whatever any one possessed before he entered into
office, that he shall possess and hold until the end of his term. Next
he assigns Choregi to the tragic poets, choosing three of the richest
persons out of the whole body of Athenians. Formerly he used also to
assign five Choregi to the comic poets, but now the tribes provide the
Choregi for them. Then he receives the Choregi who have been appointed
by the tribes for the men's and boys' choruses and the comic poets at
the Dionysia, and for the men's and boys' choruses at the Thargelia (at
the Dionysia there is a chorus for each tribe, but at the Thargelia one
between two tribes, each tribe bearing its share in providing it); he
transacts the exchanges of properties for them, and reports any excuses
that are tendered, if any one says that he has already borne this
burden, or that he is exempt because he has borne a similar burden and
the period of his exemption has not yet expired, or that he is not of
the required age; since the Choregus of a boys' chorus must be over
forty years of age. He also appoints Choregi for the festival at Delos,
and a chief of the mission for the thirty-oar boat which conveys the
youths thither. He also superintends sacred processions, both that in
honour of Asclepius, when the initiated keep house, and that of the
great Dionysia--the latter in conjunction with the Superintendents of
that festival. These officers, ten in number, were formerly elected by
open vote in the Assembly, and used to provide for the expenses of the
procession out of their private means; but now one is elected by lot
from each tribe, and the state contributes a hundred minas for the
expenses. The Archon also superintends the procession at the Thargelia,
and that in honour of Zeus the Saviour. He also manages the contests at
the Dionysia and the Thargelia.

These, then, are the festivals which he superintends. The suits and
indictments which come before him, and which he, after a preliminary
inquiry, brings up before the lawcourts, are as follows.  Injury to
parents (for bringing these actions the prosecutor cannot suffer any
penalty); injury to orphans (these actions lie against their
guardians); injury to a ward of state (these lie against their
guardians or their husbands), injury to an orphan's estate (these too
lie against the guardians); mental derangement, where a party charges
another with destroying his own property through unsoundness of mind;
for appointment of liquidators, where a party refuses to divide
property in which others have a share; for constituting a wardship; for
determining between rival claims to a wardship; for granting inspection
of property to which another party lays claim; for appointing oneself
as guardian; and for determining disputes as to inheritances and wards
of state. The Archon also has the care of orphans and wards of state,
and of women who, on the death of their husbands, declare themselves to
be with child; and he has power to inflict a fine on those who offend
against the persons under his charge, or to bring the case before the
law-courts. He also leases the houses of orphans and wards of state
until they reach the age of fourteen, and takes mortgages on them; and
if the guardians fail to provide the necessary food for the children
under their charge, he exacts it from them. Such are the duties of the
Archon.



Part 57

The King in the first place superintends the mysteries, in conjunction
with the Superintendents of Mysteries. The latter are elected in the
Assembly by open vote, two from the general body of Athenians, one from
the Eumolpidae, and one from the Ceryces. Next, he superintends the
Lenaean Dionysia, which consists of a procession and a contest. The
procession is ordered by the King and the Superintendents in
conjunction; but the contest is managed by the King alone. He also
manages all the contests of the torch-race; and to speak broadly, he
administers all the ancestral sacrifices.  Indictments for impiety come
before him, or any disputes between parties concerning priestly rites;
and he also determines all controversies concerning sacred rites for
the ancient families and the priests. All actions for homicide come
before him, and it is he that makes the proclamation requiring polluted
persons to keep away from sacred ceremonies. Actions for homicide and
wounding are heard, if the homicide or wounding be willful, in the
Areopagus; so also in cases of killing by poison, and of arson. These
are the only cases heard by that Council. Cases of unintentional
homicide, or of intent to kill, or of killing a slave or a resident
alien or a foreigner, are heard by the court of Palladium. When the
homicide is acknowledged, but legal justification is pleaded, as when a
man takes an adulterer in the act, or kills another by mistake in
battle, or in an athletic contest, the prisoner is tried in the court
of Delphinium. If a man who is in banishment for a homicide which
admits of reconciliation incurs a further charge of killing or
wounding, he is tried in Phreatto, and he makes his defence from a boat
moored near the shore. All these cases, except those which are heard in
the Areopagus, are tried by the Ephetae on whom the lot falls. The King
introduces them, and the hearing is held within sacred precincts and in
the open air.  Whenever the King hears a case he takes off his crown.
The person who is charged with homicide is at all other times excluded
from the temples, nor is it even lawful for him to enter the
market-place; but on the occasion of his trial he enters the temple and
makes his defence. If the actual offender is unknown, the writ runs
against 'the doer of the deed'. The King and the tribe-kings also hear
the cases in which the guilt rests on inanimate objects and the lower
animal.



Part 58

The Polemarch performs the sacrifices to Artemis the huntress and to
Enyalius, and arranges the contest at the funeral of those who have
fallen in war, and makes offerings to the memory of Harmodius and
Aristogeiton. Only private actions come before him, namely those in
which resident aliens, both ordinary and privileged, and agents of
foreign states are concerned. It is his duty to receive these cases and
divide them into ten groups, and assign to each tribe the group which
comes to it by lot; after which the magistrates who introduce cases for
the tribe hand them over to the Arbitrators. The Polemarch, however,
brings up in person cases in which an alien is charged with deserting
his patron or neglecting to provide himself with one, and also of
inheritances and wards of state where aliens are concerned; and in
fact, generally, whatever the Archon does for citizens, the Polemarch
does for aliens.



Part 59

The Thesmothetae in the first place have the power of prescribing on
what days the lawcourts are to sit, and next of assigning them to the
several magistrates; for the latter must follow the arrangement which
the Thesmothetae assign. Moreover they introduce impeachments before
the Assembly, and bring up all votes for removal from office,
challenges of a magistrate's conduct before the Assembly, indictments
for illegal proposals, or for proposing a law which is contrary to the
interests of the state, complaints against Proedri or their president
for their conduct in office, and the accounts presented by the
generals. All indictments also come before them in which a deposit has
to be made by the prosecutor, namely, indictments for concealment of
foreign origin, for corrupt evasion of foreign origin (when a man
escapes the disqualification by bribery), for blackmailing accusations,
bribery, false entry of another as a state debtor, false testimony to
the service of a summons, conspiracy to enter a man as a state debtor,
corrupt removal from the list of debtors, and adultery. They also bring
up the examinations of all magistrates, and the rejections by the demes
and the condemnations by the Council. Moreover they bring up certain
private suits in cases of merchandise and mines, or where a slave has
slandered a free man. It is they also who cast lots to assign the
courts to the various magistrates, whether for private or public cases.
They ratify commercial treaties, and bring up the cases which arise out
of such treaties; and they also bring up cases of perjury from the
Areopagus. The casting of lots for the jurors is conducted by all the
nine Archons, with the clerk to the Thesmothetae as the tenth, each
performing the duty for his own tribe. Such are the duties of the nine
Archons.



Part 60

There are also ten Commissioners of Games (Athlothetae), elected by
lot, one from each tribe. These officers, after passing an examination,
serve for four years; and they manage the Panathenaic procession, the
contest in music and that in gymnastic, and the horse-race; they also
provide the robe of Athena and, in conjunction with the Council, the
vases, and they present the oil to the athletes.  This oil is collected
from the sacred olives. The Archon requisitions it from the owners of
the farms on which the sacred olives grow, at the rate of
three-quarters of a pint from each plant. Formerly the state used to
sell the fruit itself, and if any one dug up or broke down one of the
sacred olives, he was tried by the Council of Areopagus, and if he was
condemned, the penalty was death. Since, however, the oil has been paid
by the owner of the farm, the procedure has lapsed, though the law
remains; and the oil is a state charge upon the property instead of
being taken from the individual plants. When, then, the Archon has
collected the oil for his year of office, he hands it over to the
Treasurers to preserve in the Acropolis, and he may not take his seat
in the Areopagus until he has paid over to the Treasurers the full
amount. The Treasurers keep it in the Acropolis until the Panathenaea,
when they measure it out to the Commissioners of Games, and they again
to the victorious competitors. The prizes for the victors in the
musical contest consist of silver and gold, for the victors in manly
vigour, of shields, and for the victors in the gymnastic contest and
the horse-race, of oil.



Part 61

All officers connected with military service are elected by open vote.
In the first place, ten Generals (Strategi), who were formerly elected
one from each tribe, but now are chosen from the whole mass of
citizens. Their duties are assigned to them by open vote; one is
appointed to command the heavy infantry, and leads them if they go out
to war; one to the defence of the country, who remains on the
defensive, and fights if there is war within the borders of the
country; two to Piraeus, one of whom is assigned to Munichia, and one
to the south shore, and these have charge of the defence of the
Piraeus; and one to superintend the symmories, who nominates the
trierarchs arranges exchanges of properties for them, and brings up
actions to decide on rival claims in connexion with them.  The rest are
dispatched to whatever business may be on hand at the moment. The
appointment of these officers is submitted for confirmation in each
prytany, when the question is put whether they are considered to be
doing their duty. If any officer is rejected on this vote, he is tried
in the lawcourt, and if he is found guilty the people decide what
punishment or fine shall be inflicted on him; but if he is acquitted he
resumes his office. The Generals have full power, when on active
service, to arrest any one for insubordination, or to cashier him
publicly, or to inflict a fine; the latter is, however, unusual.

There are also ten Taxiarchs, one from each tribe, elected by open
vote; and each commands his own tribesmen and appoints captains of
companies (Lochagi). There are also two Hipparchs, elected by open vote
from the whole mass of the citizens, who command the cavalry, each
taking five tribes. They have the same powers as the Generals have in
respect of the infantry, and their appointments are also subject to
confirmation. There are also ten Phylarchs, elected by open vote, one
from each tribe, to command the cavalry, as the Taxiarchs do the
infantry. There is also a Hipparch for Lemnos, elected by open vote,
who has charge of the cavalry in Lemnos. There is also a treasurer of
the Paralus, and another of the Ammonias, similarly elected.



Part 62

Of the magistrates elected by lot, in former times some including the
nine Archons, were elected out of the tribe as a whole, while others,
namely those who are now elected in the Theseum, were apportioned among
the demes; but since the demes used to sell the elections, these
magistrates too are now elected from the whole tribe, except the
members of the Council and the guards of the dockyards, who are still
left to the demes.

Pay is received for the following services. First the members of the
Assembly receive a drachma for the ordinary meetings, and nine obols
for the 'sovereign' meeting. Then the jurors at the law-courts receive
three obols; and the members of the Council five obols. The Prytanes
receive an allowance of an obol for their maintenance. The nine Archons
receive four obols apiece for maintenance, and also keep a herald and a
flute-player; and the Archon for Salamis receives a drachma a day. The
Commissioners for Games dine in the Prytaneum during the month of
Hecatombaeon in which the Panathenaic festival takes place, from the
fourteenth day onwards. The Amphictyonic deputies to Delos receive a
drachma a day from the exchequer of Delos. Also all magistrates sent to
Samos, Scyros, Lemnos, or Imbros receive an allowance for their
maintenance. The military offices may be held any number of times, but
none of the others more than once, except the membership of the
Council, which may be held twice.



Part 63

The juries for the law-courts are chosen by lot by the nine Archons,
each for their own tribe, and by the clerk to the Thesmothetae for the
tenth. There are ten entrances into the courts, one for each tribe;
twenty rooms in which the lots are drawn, two for each tribe; a hundred
chests, ten for each tribe; other chests, in which are placed the
tickets of the jurors on whom the lot falls; and two vases.  Further,
staves, equal in number to the jurors required, are placed by the side
of each entrance; and counters are put into one vase, equal in number
to the staves. These are inscribed with letters of the alphabet
beginning with the eleventh (lambda), equal in number to the courts
which require to be filled. All persons above thirty years of age are
qualified to serve as jurors, provided they are not debtors to the
state and have not lost their civil rights. If any unqualified person
serves as juror, an information is laid against him, and he is brought
before the court; and, if he is convicted, the jurors assess the
punishment or fine which they consider him to deserve. If he is
condemned to a money fine, he must be imprisoned until he has paid up
both the original debt, on account of which the information was laid
against him, and also the fine which the court as imposed upon him.
Each juror has his ticket of boxwood, on which is inscribed his name,
with the name of his father and his deme, and one of the letters of the
alphabet up to kappa; for the jurors in their several tribes are
divided into ten sections, with approximately an equal number in each
letter. When the Thesmothetes has decided by lot which letters are
required to attend at the courts, the servant puts up above each court
the letter which has been assigned to it by the lot.



Part 64

The ten chests above mentioned are placed in front of the entrance used
by each tribe, and are inscribed with the letters of the alphabet from
alpha to kappa. The jurors cast in their tickets, each into the chest
on which is inscribed the letter which is on his ticket; then the
servant shakes them all up, and the Archon draws one ticket from each
chest. The individual so selected is called the Ticket-hanger
(Empectes), and his function is to hang up the tickets out of his chest
on the bar which bears the same letter as that on the chest.  He is
chosen by lot, lest, if the Ticket-hanger were always the same person,
he might tamper with the results. There are five of these bars in each
of the rooms assigned for the lot-drawing. Then the Archon casts in the
dice and thereby chooses the jurors from each tribe, room by room. The
dice are made of brass, coloured black or white; and according to the
number of jurors required, so many white dice are put in, one for each
five tickets, while the remainder are black, in the same proportion. As
the Archon draws out the dice, the crier calls out the names of the
individuals chosen. The Ticket-hanger is included among those selected.
Each juror, as he is chosen and answers to his name, draws a counter
from the vase, and holding it out with the letter uppermost shows it
first to the presiding Archon; and he, when he has seen it, throws the
ticket of the juror into the chest on which is inscribed the letter
which is on the counter, so that the juror must go into the court
assigned to him by lot, and not into one chosen by himself, and that it
may be impossible for any one to collect the jurors of his choice into
any particular court. For this purpose chests are placed near the
Archon, as many in number as there are courts to be filled that day,
bearing the letters of the courts on which the lot has fallen.



Part 65

The juror thereupon, after showing his counter again to the attendant,
passes through the barrier into the court. The attendant gives him a
staff of the same colour as the court bearing the letter which is on
his counter, so as to ensure his going into the court assigned to him
by lot; since, if he were to go into any other, he would be betrayed by
the colour of his staff. Each court has a certain colour painted on the
lintel of the entrance. Accordingly the juror, bearing his staff,
enters the court which has the same colour as his staff, and the same
letter as his counter. As he enters, he receives a voucher from the
official to whom this duty has been assigned by lot. So with their
counters and their staves the selected jurors take their seats in the
court, having thus completed the process of admission. The unsuccessful
candidates receive back their tickets from the Ticket-hangers. The
public servants carry the chests from each tribe, one to each court,
containing the names of the members of the tribe who are in that court,
and hand them over to the officials assigned to the duty of giving back
their tickets to the jurors in each court, so that these officials may
call them up by name and pay them their fee.



Part 66

When all the courts are full, two ballot boxes are placed in the first
court, and a number of brazen dice, bearing the colours of the several
courts, and other dice inscribed with the names of the presiding
magistrates. Then two of the Thesmothetae, selected by lot, severally
throw the dice with the colours into one box, and those with the
magistrates' names into the other. The magistrate whose name is first
drawn is thereupon proclaimed by the crier as assigned for duty in the
court which is first drawn, and the second in the second, and similarly
with the rest. The object of this procedure is that no one may know
which court he will have, but that each may take the court assigned to
him by lot.

 When the jurors have come in, and have been assigned to their
respective courts, the presiding magistrate in each court draws one
ticket out of each chest (making ten in all, one out of each tribe),
and throws them into another empty chest. He then draws out five of
them, and assigns one to the superintendence of the water-clock, and
the other four to the telling of the votes. This is to prevent any
tampering beforehand with either the superintendent of the clock or the
tellers of the votes, and to secure that there is no malpractice in
these respects. The five who have not been selected for these duties
receive from them a statement of the order in which the jurors shall
receive their fees, and of the places where the several tribes shall
respectively gather in the court for this purpose when their duties are
completed; the object being that the jurors may be broken up into small
groups for the reception of their pay, and not all crowd together and
impede one another.



Part 67

These preliminaries being concluded, the cases are called on. If it is
a day for private cases, the private litigants are called.  Four cases
are taken in each of the categories defined in the law, and the
litigants swear to confine their speeches to the point at issue.  If it
is a day for public causes, the public litigants are called, and only
one case is tried. Water-clocks are provided, having small
supply-tubes, into which the water is poured by which the length of the
pleadings is regulated. Ten gallons are allowed for a case in which an
amount of more than five thousand drachmas is involved, and three for
the second speech on each side. When the amount is between one and five
thousand drachmas, seven gallons are allowed for the first speech and
two for the second; when it is less than one thousand, five and two.
Six gallons are allowed for arbitrations between rival claimants, in
which there is no second speech. The official chosen by lot to
superintend the water-clock places his hand on the supply tube whenever
the clerk is about to read a resolution or law or affidavit or treaty.
When, however, a case is conducted according to a set measurement of
the day, he does not stop the supply, but each party receives an equal
allowance of water. The standard of measurement is the length of the
days in the month Poseideon. The measured day is employed in cases
when imprisonment, death, exile, loss of civil rights, or confiscation
of goods is assigned as the penalty.



Part 68

Most of the courts consist of 500 members; and when it is necessary
to bring public cases before a jury of 1,000 members, two courts
combine for the purpose, the most important cases of all are brought
1,500 jurors, or three courts. The ballot balls are made of brass with
stems running through the centre, half of them having the stem pierced
and the other half solid. When the speeches are concluded, the
officials assigned to the taking of the votes give each juror two
ballot balls, one pierced and one solid. This is done in full view of
the rival litigants, to secure that no one shall receive two pierced or
two solid balls. Then the official designated for the purpose takes
away the jurors' staves, in return for which each one as he records his
vote receives a brass voucher marked with the numeral 3 (because he
gets three obols when he gives it up). This is to ensure that all shall
vote; since no one can get a voucher unless he votes. Two urns, one of
brass and the other of wood, stand in the court, in distinct spots so
that no one may surreptitiously insert ballot balls; in these the
jurors record their votes. The brazen urn is for effective votes, the
wooden for unused votes; and the brazen urn has a lid pierced so as to
take only one ballot ball, in order that no one may put in two at a
time.

When the jurors are about to vote, the crier demands first whether the
litigants enter a protest against any of the evidence; for no protest
can be received after the voting has begun. Then he proclaims again,
'The pierced ballot for the plaintiff, the solid for the defendant';
and the juror, taking his two ballot balls from the stand, with his
hand closed over the stem so as not to show either the pierced or the
solid ballot to the litigants, casts the one which is to count into the
brazen urn, and the other into the wooden urn.



Part 69

When all the jurors have voted, the attendants take the urn containing
the effective votes and discharge them on to a reckoning board having
as many cavities as there are ballot balls, so that the effective
votes, whether pierced or solid, may be plainly displayed and easily
counted. Then the officials assigned to the taking of the votes tell
them off on the board, the solid in one place and the pierced in
another, and the crier announces the numbers of the votes, the pierced
ballots being for the prosecutor and the solid for the defendant.
Whichever has the majority is victorious; but if the votes are equal
the verdict is for the defendant. Each juror receives two ballots, and
uses one to record his vote, and throws the other away.

Then, if damages have to be awarded, they vote again in the same way,
first returning their pay-vouchers and receiving back their staves.
Half a gallon of water is allowed to each party for the discussion of
the damages. Finally, when all has been completed in accordance with
the law, the jurors receive their pay in the order assigned by the lot.﻿The work commences with a general review of the animal
kingdom, and several suggestions for a natural arrangement of animals
in groups, according to their external form or their mode of life, a
comparison of animals among themselves, and a description of some of
their habits. Aristotle then introduces the human form, the best known
to man, as the standard of comparison to which he refers the rest of
the animal kingdom. The concluding chapters of this book are occupied
with a description of the several parts of the human body, both
internal and external.

BOOK II.--In the second book the different parts of animals are
described. The animals are arranged in various groups, viviparous and
oviparous quadrupeds, fish, serpents, birds. The only animals described
are those with red blood: the description of the rest being reserved
for the fourth book. Their internal organs are also described; and
in the course of the book a few animals, as the ape, elephant, and
chameleon, are especially noticed.

BOOK III.--The third book commences with a description of the internal
organs, beginning with the generative system. A considerable portion
of the book is devoted to the course of the veins; and Aristotle
quotes from other writers, as well as states the result of his own
observations. He then describes the nature of other constituent parts
of the body, sinews, fibres, bone, marrow, cartilage, nails, hoofs,
claws, horns, and beaks of birds, hair, scales, membranes, flesh, fat,
blood, marrow, milk, and the spermatic fluid.

BOOK IV.--Animals without blood, and first, the cephalopods, are
described; then the crustaceans, testacea, echinidæ, ascidians,
actiniæ, hermit crabs, insects. In the eighth chapter the organs of
sense are considered, and afterwards, the voice, sleep, age, and
differences of the sexes in animals are described.

BOOK V.--In the former books animals are for the most part described
with reference to their several parts. In the fifth book they
are treated as entire, and especially with regard to their mode
of reproduction. First of all, our author treats of spontaneous
reproduction, and then of those animals which spring from a union of
the sexes; and from this he proceeds to some detail with respect to
different groups of animals, testacea, crustacea, insects. The book
concludes with a long description of bees and their habits.

BOOK VI.--In this book the same subject is continued through the
several classes of birds, fish, and quadrupeds. This account of the
reproduction of animals includes also the consideration of the seasons,
climates, and ages of animals, and how far these influence their
reproduction.

BOOK VII.--The seventh book is almost entirely devoted to the
consideration of the reproduction of man, and an account of man from
his birth to his death. This book ends abruptly, and is probably
imperfect.

BOOK VIII.--In the eighth book Aristotle passes on to the most
interesting part of his work, the character and habits of the whole
animal world, as it was known to him. The amount of detail which he has
collected and arranged on this subject is most interesting. He treats,
first of all, of the food of animals, of their migrations, their health
and diseases, and the influence of climate upon them.

BOOK IX.--The subject of the eighth book is continued, with an account
of the relations in which animals stand to each other, and especially
the friendship and hostility of different species; and these are for
the most part referred to the nature of their food, and their mode
of procuring it. The notices of fish are not so numerous as those of
other groups: this would necessarily arise from the difficulty of
observation. At the conclusion of the book, an essay on bees and their
congeners is given at considerable length.

BOOK X.--This book, in all probability erroneously ascribed to
Aristotle, is occupied with a treatise on the causes of barrenness
in the human species. It appears to be rather a continuation of the
seventh book, which ends abruptly; but it is well placed at the end, as
no genuine work of our author.




THE HISTORY OF ANIMALS.




BOOK THE FIRST.


CHAPTER I.

1. Some parts of animals are simple, and these can be divided into like
parts, as flesh into pieces of flesh; others are compound, and cannot
be divided into like parts, as the hand cannot be divided into hands,
nor the face into faces. Of these some are not only called parts, but
members, such as those which, though entire in themselves, are made up
of other parts, as the head and the leg, the hand and the entire arm,
or the trunk; for these parts are both entire in themselves, and made
up of other parts.

2. All the compound parts also are made up of simple parts, the hand,
for example, of flesh, and sinew, and bone. Some animals have all these
parts the same, in others they are different from each other. Some of
the parts are the same in form, as the nose and eye of one man is the
same as the nose and eye of another man, and flesh is the same with
flesh, and bone with bone. In like manner we may compare the parts of
the horse, and of other animals, those parts, that is, which are the
same in species, for the whole bears the same relation to the whole as
the parts do to each other. And in animals belonging to the same class,
the parts are the same, only they differ in excess or defect. By class,
I mean such as bird or fish, for all these differ if either compared
with their own class or with another, and there are many forms of birds
and fishes.

3. Nearly all their parts differ in them according to the opposition
of their external qualities, such as colour or shape, in that some are
more, others are less affected, or sometimes in number more or less,
or in size greater and smaller, or in any quality which can be included
in excess or defect. For some animals have a soft skin, in others the
skin is shelly; some have a long bill, as cranes, others a short one;
some have many feathers, others very few; some also have parts which
are wanting in others, for some species have spurs, others have none;
some have a crest, others have not. But, so to say, their principal
parts and those which form the bulk of their body, are either the same,
or vary only in their opposites, and in excess and defect.

4. By excess and defect I mean the greater and the less. But some
animals agree with each other in their parts neither in form, nor in
excess and defect, but have only an analogous likeness, such as a bone
bears to a spine, a nail to a hoof, a hand to a crab's claw, the scale
of a fish to the feather of a bird, for that which is a feather in
the birds is a scale in the fish. With regard then to the parts which
each class of animal possesses, they agree and differ in this manner,
and also in the position of the parts. For many animals have the same
parts, but not in the same position, as the mammæ which are either
pectoral or abdominal. But of the simple parts some are soft and moist,
others hard and dry.

5. The soft parts are either entirely so, or so long as they are in a
natural condition, as blood, serum, fat, tallow, marrow, semen, gall,
milk (in those animals which give milk), flesh, and other analogous
parts of the body. In another manner also the excretions of the body
belong to this class, as phlegm, and the excrements of the abdomen and
bladder; the hard and dry parts are sinew, skin, vein, hair, bone,
cartilage, nail, horn, for that part bears the same name, and on
the whole is called horn, and the other parts of the body which are
analogous to these.

6. Animals also differ in their manner of life, in their actions and
dispositions, and in their parts. We will first of all speak generally
of these differences, and afterwards consider each species separately.
The following are the points in which they vary in manner of life, in
their actions and dispositions. Some animals are aquatic, others live
on the land; and the aquatic may again be divided into two classes, for
some entirely exist and procure their food in the water, and take in
and give out water, and cannot live without it; this is the nature of
most fishes. But there are others which, though they live and feed in
the water, do not take in water but air, and produce their young out of
the water. Many of these animals are furnished with feet, as the otter
and the latax[1] and the crocodile, or with wings, as the seagull and
diver, and others are without feet, as the water-serpent. Some procure
their food from the water, and cannot live out of the water, but
neither inhale air nor water, as the acalephe[2] and the oyster.

[1] Beaver, Castor fiber.

[2] Medusa, or perhaps Actinia, or both.

7. Different aquatic animals are found in the sea, in rivers, in lakes,
and in marshes, as the frog and newt, and of marine animals some are
pelagic, some littoral, and some saxatile. Some land animals take in
and give out air, and this is called inhaling and exhaling; such are
man, and all other land animals which are furnished with lungs; some,
however, which procure their food from the earth, do not inhale air, as
the wasp, the bee, and all other insects.[3] By insects I mean those
animals which have divisions in their bodies, whether in the lower part
only, or both in the upper and lower. Many land animals, as I have
already observed, procure their food from the water, but there are no
aquatic or marine animals which find their food on land. There are some
animals which at first inhabit the water, but afterwards change into a
different form, and live out of the water; this happens to the gnat in
the rivers, and ...[4] which afterwards becomes an œstrum.[5]

[3] Under the class ἔντομα are probably included all annulose animals.

[4] Some words appear to be lost in this place.

[5] Tabanus, gad-fly.

8. Again, there are some creatures which are stationary, while others
are locomotive; the fixed animals are aquatic, but this is not the
case with any of the inhabitants of the land. Many aquatic animals
also grow upon each other; this is the case with several genera of
shell-fish: the sponge also exhibits some signs of sensation, for they
say that it is drawn up with some difficulty, unless the attempt to
remove it is made stealthily. Other animals also there are which are
alternately fixed together or free, this is the case with a certain
kind of acalephe; some of these become separated during the night, and
emigrate. Many animals are separate from each other, but incapable of
voluntary movement, as oysters, and the animal called holothuria.[6]
Some aquatic animals are swimmers, as fish, and the mollusca,[7] and
the malacostraca, as the crabs. Others creep on the bottom, as the
crab, for this, though an aquatic animal, naturally creeps.

[6] Perhaps some species of Zoophyte.

[7] Cephalopods.

9. Of land animals some are furnished with wings, as birds and bees,
and these differ in other respects from each other; others have feet,
and of this class some species walk, others crawl, and others creep
in the mud. There is no animal which has only wings as fish have only
fins, for those animals whose wings are formed by an expansion of the
skin can walk, and the bat has feet, the seal has imperfect feet. Among
birds there are some with very imperfect feet, which are therefore
called apodes; they are, however, provided with very strong wings, and
almost all birds that are similar to this one have strong wings and
imperfect feet, as the swallow and drepanis;[8] for all this class of
birds is alike both in habits and in the structure of their wings, and
their whole appearance is very similar. The apos[9] is seen at all
times of the year, but the drepanis can only be taken in rainy weather
during the summer, and on the whole is a rare bird.

[8] Perhaps Sand martin.

[9] Swift.

10. Many animals, however, can both walk and swim. The following are
the differences exhibited by animals in their habits and their actions.
Some of them are gregarious, and others solitary, both in the classes
which are furnished with feet, and those which have wings, or fins.
Some partake of both characters, and of those that are gregarious, as
well as those that are solitary, some unite in societies and some are
scattered. Gregarious birds are such as the pigeon, stork, swan, but no
bird with hooked claws is gregarious. Among swimming animals some fish
are gregarious, as the dromas,[10] tunny, pelamis,[11] amia.[12]

[10] Some migratory fish.

[11] A kind of tunny, still called palamyde at Marseilles.

[12] A kind of tunny, Les Bonitons (Camus.)

11. But man partakes of both qualities. Those which have a common
employment are called social, but that is not the case with all
gregarious animals. Man, and the bee, the wasp, and the ant, and the
stork belong to this class. Some of these obey a leader, others are
anarchical; the stork and the bee are of the former class, the ant and
many others belong to the latter. Some animals, both in the gregarious
and solitary class, are limited to one locality, others are migratory.
There are also carnivorous animals, herbivorous, omnivorous, and
others which eat peculiar food, as the bee and the spider; the former
eats only honey and a few other sweet things, while spiders prey upon
flies and there are other animals which feed entirely on fish. Some
animals hunt for their food, and some make a store, which others do
not. There are also animals which make habitations for themselves, and
others which do not. The mole, the mouse, the ant, and the bee, make
habitations, but many kinds both of insects and quadrupeds make no
dwelling.

12. With regard to situation, some are troglodite, as lizards and
serpents, others, as the horse and dog, live upon the surface of the
earth. Some kinds of animals burrow in the ground, others do not; some
animals are nocturnal, as the owl and the bat, others use the hours of
daylight. There are tame animals and wild animals. Man and the mule
are always tame, the leopard and the wolf are invariably wild, and
others, as the elephant, are easily tamed. We may, however, view them
in another way, for all the genera that have been tamed are found wild
also, as horses, oxen, swine, sheep, goats, and dogs.

13. Some animals utter a loud cry, some are silent, and others have a
voice, which in some cases may be expressed by a word, in others it
cannot. There are also noisy animals and silent animals, musical and
unmusical kinds, but they are mostly noisy about the breeding season.
Some, as the dove, frequent fields, others, as the hoopoe, live on
the mountains; some attach themselves to man, as the pigeon. Some are
lascivious, as the partridge and domestic fowl, and others are chaste,
as the raven, which rarely cohabits.

14. Again, there are classes of animals furnished with weapons of
offence, others with weapons of defence; in the former I include those
which are capable of inflicting an injury, or of defending themselves
when they are attacked; in the latter those which are provided with
some natural protection against injury.

15. Animals also exhibit many differences of disposition. Some are
gentle, peaceful, and not violent, as the ox. Some are violent,
passionate, and intractable, as the wild boar. Some are prudent and
fearful, as the stag and the hare. Serpents are illiberal and crafty.
Others, as the lion, are liberal, noble, and generous. Others are
brave, wild, and crafty, like the wolf. For there is this difference
between the generous and the brave--the former means that which comes
of a noble race, the latter that which does not easily depart from its
own nature.

16. Some animals are cunning and evil-disposed, as the fox; others, as
the dog, are fierce, friendly, and fawning. Some are gentle and easily
tamed, as the elephant; some are susceptible of shame, and watchful, as
the goose. Some are jealous, and fond of ornament, as the peacock. But
man is the only animal capable of reasoning, though many others possess
the faculty of memory and instruction in common with him. No other
animal but man has the power of recollection. In another place we will
treat more accurately of the disposition and manner of life in each
class.


CHAPTER II.

1. All animals possess in common those parts by which they take in
food, and into which they receive it. But these parts agree or differ
in the same way as all the other parts of bodies, that is, either in
shape or size, or proportion or position; and besides these, almost
all animals possess many other parts in common, such as those by which
they reject their excrements, (and the part by which they take their
food,)[13] though this does not exist in all. The part by which the
food is taken in is called the mouth, that which receives the food from
the mouth is called the stomach. The part by which they reject the
excrement has many names.

[13] The words in brackets should probably be excluded from the text.

2. The excrement being of two kinds, the animals which possess
receptacles for the fluid excrement have also receptacles for the dry;
but those which have the latter are not always furnished with the
former. Wherefore all animals which have a bladder have a belly also,
but not all that have a belly have a bladder; for the part appropriated
to the reception of the liquid excrement is called the bladder, and
that for the reception of the dry is called the belly.

3. Many animals possess both these parts, and that also by which the
semen is emitted. Among animals that have the power of generation,
some emit the semen into themselves, and some inject it into others.
The former are called female, the latter male. In some animals there
is neither male nor female, and there is a diversity in the form of
the parts appropriated to this office. For some animals have a uterus,
others have only something analogous to the uterus. These are the most
essential organs; some of which exist in all animals, others in the
majority only.


CHAPTER III.

1. There is only one sense, that of touch, which is common to all
animals; so that no exact name can be given to the part in which this
sense resides, for in some animals it is the same, in others only
analogous.

2. Every living creature is furnished with moisture, and must die, if
deprived of this moisture either in the course of nature or by force.
But in what part of the body this moisture resides is another question.
In some animals it is found in the blood and veins, in others the
situation is only analogous, but these are imperfect, as fibres and
serum.[14] The sense of touch resides in the simple parts, as in the
flesh and in similar places, and generally in those parts which contain
blood, at least in those animals which have blood; in others it resides
in the analogous parts, but in all animals in the simple parts.

[14] Fibres and serum, as compared with veins and blood, refer to the
circulation in animals without red blood.

3. The capacity of action resides in the compound parts, as the
preparation of food in the mouth, and the power of locomotion in
the feet or wings, or the analogous parts. Again, some animals are
sanguineous, as man, the horse, and all perfect animals, whether
apodous, bipeds, or quadrupeds; and some animals are without blood,
as the bee and the wasp, and such marine animals as the sepia and the
carabus,[15] and all animals with more than four legs.

[15] Palinurus, Spiny Lobster.


CHAPTER IV.

1. There are also viviparous, oviparous, and vermiparous animals. The
viviparous, are such as man, and the horse, the seal, and others which
have hair, and among marine animals the cetacea, as the dolphin and
those which are called selache.[16] Some of these are furnished with a
blow-hole, but have no gills, as the dolphin and the whale. The dolphin
has its blow-hole on the back, the whale in its forehead; others have
open gills, as the selache, the galeus,[17] and the batus.[18] That
is called the egg of the perfect fœtus, from which the future animal
is produced, from a part at first, while the remainder serves for its
food. The worm is that from the whole of which the future animal is
produced, and the fœtus afterwards acquires parts and increases in size.

[16] Cartilaginous fishes.

[17] Squalus galeus.

[18] Raia batos.

2. Some viviparous animals are internally oviparous, as the selache;
others are internally viviparous, as mankind and the horse. In
different animals the fœtus assumes a different form, when first
brought into the world, and is either a living creature, an egg, or
a worm. The eggs of some animals, as birds, are hard-shelled, and
are of two colours. Those of the selache and some other animals are
soft-skinned, and have only one colour. Some species of the vermiform
fœtus are capable of motion, others are not. But in another place, when
we treat of generation, we will dwell more accurately on these subjects.


CHAPTER V.

1. Some animals have feet, others have none; of the former some have
two feet, as mankind and birds only; others have four, as the lizard
and the dog; others, as the scolopendra and bee, have many feet; but
all have their feet in pairs.

2. And among apodous swimming animals some have fins, as fish; and of
these some have two fins in the upper and two in the lower part of
their bodies, as the chrysophys[19] and labrax;[20] others, which are
very long and smooth, have only two fins, as the eel and conger; others
have none at all, as the lamprey and others, which live in the sea as
serpents do on land, and in like manner swim in moist places; and some
of the genus selache, as those which are flat and have tails, as the
batos and trygon, have no fins; these fish swim by means of their flat
surfaces; but the batrachus[21] has fins, and so have all those fish
which are not very thin in proportion to their width.

[19] Sparus auratus.

[20] Perca labrax.

[21] Lophius piscatorius and also L. barbatus.

3. But the animals which have apparent feet, as the cephalopods, swim
both with their feet and fins, and move quickly upon the hollow parts
of their bodies, as the sepia, teuthis, and polypus: but none of them
can walk except the polypus. Those animals which have hard skins, as
the carabus, swim with their hinder parts, and move very quickly upon
their tail, with the fins which are upon it, and the newt both with its
feet and tail, and (to compare small things with great) it has a tail
like the glanis.[22]

[22] Silurus glanis, L. (Strack).

4. Some winged animals, as the eagle and the hawk, are feathered;
others, as the cockchafer and the bee, membranaceous wings; and others,
as the alopex[23] and the bat, have wings formed of skin. Both the
feathered and leather-winged tribes have blood; but the insects,
which have naked wings, have no blood. Again, the feathered and
leather-winged animals are all either bipeds or apodous, for they say
that there are winged serpents in Ethiopia.[24]

[23] Probably some kind of flying squirrel.

[24] Herodotus, ii. 76; "the form of this serpent is similar to that of
the water-snake; its wings are not feathered, but like those of bats:"
the _draco volans_ may have given rise to this story.

5. The feathered tribe of animals is called birds; the other two
tribes have no exact names. Among winged creatures without blood
some are coleopterous, for they have elytra over their wings, as the
cockchafer and the beetles, and others are without elytra. The animals
of this class have either two or four wings. Those with four wings are
distinguished by their greater size or a caudal sting. The diptera are
either such as are small, or have a sting in their head. The coleoptera
have no sting at all; the diptera have a sting in their head, as the
fly, horse-fly, gad-fly, and gnat.

6. All bloodless animals, except a few marine species of the
cephalopoda, are smaller than those which have blood. These animals
are the largest in warm waters, and more so in the sea than on the
land, and in fresh water. All creatures that are capable of motion are
moved by four or more limbs. Those with blood have four limbs only,
as man has two hands and two feet. Birds have two wings and two feet;
quadrupeds and fishes have four feet or four fins. But those animals
which have two wings or none at all, as the serpent, are nevertheless
moved by four limbs; for the bendings of their body are four in number,
or two when they have two wings.

7. Those bloodless animals which have more than four feet, whether
furnished with feet or wings, always have more than four organs of
locomotion, as the ephemera, which has four feet and four wings; and in
this it not only agrees with its peculiar manner of life, from which
also it derives its name, but also that it is winged and four-footed;
and all creatures, whether they have four feet or many feet, move in
the same direction, for they all move in the long way of their bodies.
All other animals have two leading feet, the crab alone has four.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The following are the principal classes which include other
animals--birds, fishes, cetacea. All these have red blood. There is
another class of animals covered with a shell, and called shell fish,
and an anonymous class of soft-shelled animals (malacostraca), which
includes carabi, carcini, and astaci; and another of mollusca, such as
teuthis, teuthos, and sepia; and another class of annulose animals.
All these are without blood, and the species with feet have many feet.
There are no large classes of other animals; for there are many forms
which are not included under a single form, but either stand alone,
having no specific difference, as man, or have specific differences,
but the classes are anonymous.

2. All animals with four feet and no wings have blood. Some of these
are viviparous, others oviparous. The viviparous are not all covered
with hair, but the oviparous have scales. The scale of a reptile is
similar in situation to the scale of a fish. The class of serpents,
sanguineous land animals, is naturally without feet. Though some have
feet, this class is also covered with scales. All serpents, except the
viper, are oviparous. The viper alone is viviparous, so that not all
viviparous animals have hair; for some fishes also are viviparous. All
animals, however, that have hair are viviparous; for we may consider
the prickles of the hedgehog and porcupine as analogous to the hair of
animals; for they answer the purpose of hair, and not, as in marine
animals that are so covered, of feet.[25]

[25] The Echinidæ.

3. There are also many classes of viviparous quadrupeds, but they have
never received names. Each kind must, therefore, be taken separately,
as man, as we speak of lion, stag, horse, dog, and of others in like
manner. There is, however, one class of those that have a mane called
lophuri,[26] as the horse, ass, mule, ginnus,[27] hinnus, and those
which in Syria are called mules,[28] from their resemblance, though
not quite of the same form. They copulate and produce young from each
other, so that it is necessary to consider well the nature of each of
them separately.

[26] Animals with long hair on their tails.

[27] Ginnus is the offspring of a mule and mare. Book vi. 24, 1.

[28] Hemionus, perhaps the foal of a horse and wild ass, and so
distinct from oreus, the foal of the he-ass and mare.

4. We have now treated of these things in an outline, for the sake of
giving a taste of what we are afterwards to consider, and of how many.
Hereafter we will speak of them more accurately, in order that we may
first of all examine into their points of difference and agreement;
and afterwards we will endeavour to inquire into the causes of these
things, but it will be a more natural arrangement to do so when we
treat of the history of each. For it is evident from these things what
they are, and what we have to demonstrate.

5. Our first subject of consideration must be the parts of which
animals are made up, for these constitute the chief and the whole
difference among them; either because they have them or are without
them, or these parts vary in position or arrangement, or in any of the
differences mentioned before, in form, size, proportion, and difference
of accidents. First of all, then, we will consider the parts of the
human body; for, as every one can best understand the standard of
money with which he is most familiar, so it is in other things. And of
necessity, man must be the best known to us of all animals. The parts
of the body are, indeed, plain enough to every one's common sense; but,
that we may not forsake our arrangement, and may have reason as well as
perception, we will speak, first of all, of the organic, and afterwards
of the simple, parts.


CHAPTER VII.

1. These are the principal parts into which the whole body is divided.
The head, neck, trunk, two arms, and two legs. The whole cavity, from
the neck to the pudenda, is called the trunk. That part of the head
which is covered with hair is called the cranium, the fore part of this
is called the sinciput. This is the last formed, being the last bone
in the body which becomes hard; the hinder part is the occiput, and
between the occiput and sinciput is the crown of the head. The brain is
placed beneath the sinciput, and the occiput is empty;[29] the cranium
is a thin spherical bone covered with a skin without flesh. The skull
has sutures: in women there is but one placed in a circle; men have
generally three joined in one, and a man's skull has been seen without
any sutures at all. The middle and smooth part of the hair is called
the crown of the head; in some persons this is double, for there are
some people double-crowned, not from any formation of the bone, but
only from the division of the hair.

[29] This mistake is again repeated in Ch. xiii.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. The part immediately beneath the cranium is called the face in
mankind alone, for we do not speak of the face of a fish or of an ox;
the part immediately beneath the sinciput and between the eyes is
called the forehead. Those in whom this feature is large are tardy;
those who have a small forehead are easily excited; a broad forehead
belongs to those who are liable to be carried away by their feelings; a
round forehead is a sign of a passionate disposition.

2. Under the forehead are two eyebrows; if they are straight, it is a
mark of a gentle disposition; the eyebrows bent down to the nose are
an evidence of an austere temper; if they incline towards the temples,
of a mocker and scoffer; if they are drawn down, it is a sign of an
envious person. Beneath these are the eyes, which by nature are two in
number: the parts of each eye are, first, the upper and under eyelid,
the edges of which are furnished with hair. Within the eye, the moist
part with which we see is called the pupil; round this is the iris,
and this is surrounded by the white. Two corners of the eye are formed
at the junction of the eyelids, one in the direction of the nose, the
other towards the temple. If these corners are large, they are a sign
of an evil disposition; if those near the nose are fleshy, and have a
swollen appearance, they are an evidence of wickedness.

3. All other classes of animals have eyes, except shell-fish, and some
other imperfect creatures, and all viviparous animals except moles have
eyes. A person might, however, conclude from the following observation,
that it has eyes, though it is quite without them, for it certainly
does not see at all, nor has it any external eyes; but, when the skin
is taken off, there is a place for the eyes, and the iris of the eye is
in the place which it would naturally occupy on the outside, as if they
had been wounded in their birth, and the skin had grown over the place.

4. The white of the eye is generally the same in all animals, but the
iris is very different. In some it is black, in others decidedly grey,
in others dark grey, and in some it is the colour of the goat's eye,
and this is a sign of the best disposition, and is most to be prized
for acuteness of vision. Man is almost the only animal which exhibits a
variety of colouring in the eye; there are, however, some horses with
grey eyes.

5. The eyes of some persons are large, others small, and others of
a moderate size--the last-mentioned are the best. And some eyes are
projecting, some deep-set, and some moderate, and those which are
deep-set have the most acute vision in all animals; the middle position
is a sign of the best disposition. Some people have an eye which is
perpetually opening and closing, others have an eye always intent, and
others a moderately-intent eye: this last is the best disposed; of the
others, the one is impudent, and the other a sign of infirmity.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The part of the head by which we hear, but do not breathe, is the
ear; for Alcmæon is mistaken when he says that goats breathe through
their ears. One part of the ear has not received any name, the other
part is called the lobe. The whole ear is made up of cartilage and
flesh. Internally, the ear has the nature of a shell, and the last bone
is similar to the ear itself. The sound reaches this part last, as it
were in a chamber. There is no passage from the ear into the brain, but
there is to the roof of the mouth; and a vein extends from the brain to
each ear.[30] The eyes also are connected with the brain, and each eye
is placed upon a vein.

[30] Eustachian tube.

2. Man is the only animal with ears that cannot move them. Among
animals which have the faculty of hearing; some have ears, and others,
as winged and scaly creatures, have no ear, but an open orifice in the
head; all viviparous animals, except the seal, and the dolphin, and
other cetacea, have ears; the selache also are viviparous. The seal has
open orifices by which it hears; the dolphin can hear, though it has
no ears; all other animals can move their ears, but man alone does not
move them.

3. The ears (of man) lie in the same circle with his eyes, and not
above them, as in some quadrupeds. The ears are either smooth, hairy,
or moderate. These last are the best for hearing, but they do not in
any way indicate the disposition. They are large, or small or middling,
or they are erect, or not at all, or only moderately erect. The
moderately erect are a sign of the best disposition; large and erect
ears are an evidence of foolish talking and loquacity. The part of the
head between the eye and the ear is called the temple.

4. In the middle of the face is the nose, the passage for the breath,
for through this animals inhale and exhale, and through it also they
sneeze; this is the expulsion of a concentrated breath, and is the
only kind of breathing which is esteemed ominous or sacred: moreover,
inhaling and exhaling is into the chest, and without the nostrils it
is impossible to inhale or exhale, for inhaling and exhaling is from
the breast by the windpipe, and not from any part of the head. But it
is possible to live without this respiration through the nostrils.
The smell also resides in this part; this is the sense of odour. The
nostril is very moveable, and not naturally immoveable like the ear.

5. One part of the nose, namely, the division between the nostrils, is
cartilaginous, but the passage is empty, for the nose is formed of two
divisions. In the elephant, the nostril is very large and strong, and
it answers to the purpose of a hand, for the animal can extend it, and
with it take its food, and convey it to its mouth, whether the food is
moist or dry. This is the only animal that can do so.

6. There are also two jaws, the upper and the under. All animals move
the lower jaw, except the river-crocodile, and this moves the upper jaw
only. Below the nose are two lips, the flesh of which is very moveable.
The mouth is the centre of the jaws and the lips. The upper part is
called the roof of the mouth, the lower, the pharynx. The tongue is the
organ of taste. This sense resides in the tip, and, if food is placed
on the broad part of the tongue, the taste is less acute. The tongue
partakes of all the other sensations, as harshness, heat, and cold, as
well as that of taste, in common with the rest of the flesh.

7. The flat part of the tongue is either narrow or moderate in size,
the moderate is the best, and most apt for clear elocution. The
tongue may be either too loose, or tied down, as in stammerers and
inarticulate speakers. The flesh of the tongue is porous and spongy.
The epiglottis is a portion of the tongue, the double part of the mouth
is the tonsils; that in many divisions the gums, they are fleshy, and
in them are fixed the bony teeth. Within the mouth there is another
part, the uvula, a pillar filled with blood. If this part is swelled
with relaxation, it is called a grape, and chokes.


CHAPTER X.

1. The neck is the part between the head and the trunk; the front
part is called the larynx, behind this is the œsophagus. The voice
and the breath pass through the front part, the trachea, which is
cartilaginous, but the œsophagus is fleshy, and placed farther in, near
the vertebra of the neck. The back of the neck is called the epomis.
These are the parts as far as the thorax. The parts of the thorax are
some before and some behind. First of all, below the neck is the breast
with two mammæ; on these are two nipples, through which the milk of the
female passes. The mamma is porous. There is also milk in the breasts
of men. The flesh of the mamma in men is thick, in women it is spongy
and full of pores.

2. The part below the thorax, in front, is the belly, and of this the
navel is the centre. Beneath this centre, the part on each side is
called the iliac region; the part in the centre, beneath the navel, is
called the hypogastric region; the lowest part of this is called pubes;
above the navel is the epigastric region; the lumbar region is situated
between the epigastric and iliac regions.

3. Of the hinder parts the loin forms the division of the body, whence
also its name is derived (ὀσφύς quasi ἰσοφύς). The part of the central
region which is like a seat is the buttock; that on which the thigh
turns, the cotyledon. The peculiar part of women is the uterus; of men
the penis, it is external, at the extremity of the trunk in two parts;
the upper part is fleshy and smooth, and is called glans; this is
covered with an anonymous skin, which, if it is cut asunder, does not
unite again, neither does the cheek nor the eyelid.

4. Common to this and the glans is the prepuce, the remaining part is
cartilaginous, readily increases in size, and it is drawn in and out,
contrary to that of the class of animals called lophuri. Beneath the
penis are two testicles, surrounded by a skin called the scrotum; the
testicles are not of the same nature as flesh, nor are they made of
flesh. In another place we shall treat of the nature of all these parts
more accurately.

5. The pudendum muliebre is contrary to that of the male, for it is
hollow under the pubes, not projecting like that of the male, and the
urethra is outside the womb, for the passage of the semen of the male,
and for the fluid excrement of both. The part of the body which joins
the neck and the breast is called the jugulum; that which unites the
side, the arm, and the shoulder is the arm-pit. The region between the
thigh and the hypogastric region is called the groin; the part common
to the thigh and the buttock on the inside is the perineum, that of the
thigh and buttock on the outside is called hypoglutis.

6. We have previously treated of the trunk. The hinder part of the
breast is called the back: the parts of the back are two shoulder
blades and the back-bone; below the thorax, and opposite the stomach,
are the loins; the ribs belong both to the back and the front of the
trunk, and are eight on each side, for we have never heard anything
worthy of credit concerning the Ligyes, who are said to have seven ribs.


CHAPTER XI.

1. Man has upper and lower side, the front and the back, and right and
left side. The right and the left are nearly alike in their parts and
in every particular, except that the left side is the weaker; but the
back parts are not like the front; nor the lower parts to the upper,
except in this particular, that the parts below the hypogastric region
are full-fleshed or lean in proportion to the face, and the arms also
answer to the proportion of the legs. Those persons who have a short
humerus have also generally a short thigh: those who have small feet
have also small hands.

2. One of the double parts of the body is the arm. The parts of the arm
are the shoulder, humerus, elbow, cubitus, and the hand; the parts of
the hand are the palm and five fingers; the jointed part of the finger
is the condyle, the unjointed part the phalanx. The thumb has but one
joint, all the rest have two. The bending of the arm and finger is
always inwards. The arm is also bent at the elbow: the inner part of
the hand is called the palm; it is fleshy, and divided by strong lines.
Long-lived persons have one or two lines which extend through the whole
hand; short-lived persons have two lines not extending through the
whole hand. The joint of the hand and arm is the wrist. The outside of
the hand is sinewy, and has not received any name.

3. The other double part of the body is the leg. The double-headed
part of the leg is called the thigh, the moveable part is called the
patella, that which has two bones the tibia; the front of this part
is the shin, the hind part the calf of the leg. The flesh is full of
sinews and veins; in those persons who have large hips, the flesh is
drawn upwards towards the hollow part under the knee, in those who
have not it is drawn down. The lowest part of the shin is the ankle,
and this is double in each leg. The part of the leg with many bones is
called the foot, the hind part of which is the heel. The front part is
divided into five toes; the under part, which is fleshy, is called the
sole of the foot; the upper part, (the instep,) is sinewy, and has not
received any name. One part of the toe is the nail, the other is the
joint; the nail is on the extremity of the toe, and the toes are bent
inwards. Those who have the sole of the foot thick, and not hollow, but
walk upon the whole of the foot, are knavish. The common joint of the
thigh and the leg is the knee.


CHAPTER XII.

1. These parts are possessed in common by the male and female; the
position of the external parts, whether above or below, before or
behind, on the right side or the left, will appear on mere inspection.
It is necessary, however, to enumerate them, for the reasons which I
have mentioned before, that its proper place being assigned to each
part, any difference in their arrangement in man and other animals may
be less likely to escape our notice.

2. In man, the parts of the body are more naturally divided into upper
and lower than in any other animal, for all the upper and lower parts
of his body are arranged according to the order of nature above and
below; in the same way, also, the fore and hind parts, and those on
the right and left, are placed naturally. But in other animals some
of these parts are either not at all so placed, or they are much more
confused than in man. The head is placed above the body in all animals,
but in man alone, as we have said, is this part corresponding to the
order of all things.

3. Next to the head is the neck, then the breast and the back, the
one before and the other behind; and each of them in the following
order:--the stomach, loins, pudenda, haunch, then the thigh and leg,
and, last of all, the foot. The legs have the joint bent forwards, in
which direction also is their manner of walking, and the more moveable
part of the legs as well as the joint is bent forward: the heel is
behind. Each of the ankles is like an ear. From the right and left side
come arms, having the joint bent inwards, so that the flexures both of
the legs and arms are towards each other, especially in man.

4. The senses and the organs of sense, the eyes, nostril, and tongue
are in the same position, and in the anterior part of the body; but
the hearing, and its organ, and the ears are at the side, and upon the
same circumference as the eyes. Man has the eyes closer together, in
proportion to his size, than other animals. The sense of touch is the
most accurate of the human senses, and next to this the taste. In the
rest of his senses he is far surpassed by other animals.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. The external parts of the body are arranged in this manner; and, as
I have said, are for the most part named and known from habit. But the
internal parts are not so well known, and those of the human body are
the least known. So that in order to explain them we must compare them
with the same parts of those animals which are most nearly allied.

2. First of all, the brain is placed in the fore-part of the head, and
it occupies the same position in all animals that have this part, which
belongs to all sanguineous and cephalopodous animals. In proportion to
his size, man has the largest brain of all animals, and the moistest.
Two membranes enclose the brain: that outside the skull is the
strongest; the inner membrane is slighter than the outer one. In all
animals the brain is in two portions. The cerebellum is placed upon the
brain at its lowest extremity. It is different from the brain both to
the touch and in appearance.

3. The back of the head is empty and hollow in all animals in
proportion to their size, for some have a large head, but the part
lying under the face is less in those animals which have round faces;
others have a small head and large jaws, as the whole tribe of Lophuri.
In all animals the brain is without blood, nor does it contain any
veins, and it is naturally cold to the touch. The greater number of
animals have a small cavity in the centre of the brain. And round this
a membrane filled with veins: this membrane is like skin, and encloses
the brain. Above the brain is the smoothest and weakest bone in the
head--it is called sinciput.

4. Three passages lead from the eye to the brain; the largest and the
middle-sized to the cerebellum, the least to the brain itself. The
least is that which is nearest the nostril; the greater are parallel,
and do not meet; but the middle-sized passages meet: this is most
evident in fishes, and these passages are nearer to the brain than the
larger, but the least separate from each other, and do not meet.

5. Within the neck is the œsophagus, which also derives its additional
name, the isthmus, from its length and narrowness, and the trachea. The
trachea lies in front of the œsophagus in all animals which possess
this part, that is, all animals which breathe from the lungs. The
trachea is cartilaginous in its nature, and contains but little blood:
it is surrounded with many smooth rings of cartilage, and it lies
upon the upper part towards the mouth, opposite the passage from the
nostril to the mouth, wherefore, also, if any liquid is drawn into it
in drinking, it passes out of the mouth through the nostrils.

6. Between the passages is the epiglottis, which can be folded over the
passage which extends from the trachea to the mouth; by the epiglottis
the passage of the tongue is closed, at the other extremity the trachea
reaches to the middle of the lungs, and afterwards divides to each
side of the lungs. For the lung is double in all animals which possess
this part, though the division is not so marked in viviparous animals,
and least of all in man. The human lungs are anomalous, neither being
divided into many lobes, as in other animals, nor being smooth.

7. In oviparous animals, such as birds and the oviparous quadrupeds,
the parts are very widely separated, so that they appear to have two
lungs; they are, however, only two divisions of the trachea extending
to each side of the lungs; the trachea is also united with the great
vein and with the part called the aorta. When the trachea is filled
with air, it distributes the breath into the cavities of the lungs,
which have cartilaginous interstices ending in a point; the passages
of these interstices go through the whole lungs, always dividing from
greater into less.

8. The heart is connected with the trachea by fatty and cartilaginous
muscular bands. There is a cavity near the junction, and in some
animals, when the trachea is filled with breath, this cavity is not
always distinguishable, but in larger animals it is evident that the
breath enters it. This then is the form of the trachea, which only
inhales and exhales breath, and nothing else either dry or moist, or it
suffers pain till that which has passed down is coughed up.

9. The œsophagus is joined to the mouth from above, near the trachea,
being united both to the spine and the trachea by membranaceous
ligaments. It passes through the diaphragm into the cavity of the
stomach, is fleshy in its nature, and is extensible both in length and
breadth. The human stomach is like that of a dog, not a great deal
larger than the entrail, but like a wide bowel; after this there is an
entrail simply rolled together, then an entrail of moderate width. The
lower part of the abdomen is like that of a hog, for it is wide, and
from this to the seat it is short and thick.

10. The omentum is united to the abdomen in the middle, and is in its
nature a fatty membrane, as in other animals with a single stomach
and teeth in both jaws. The mesenterium is over the bowels; it is
membranaceous, broad, and fat; it is united to the great vein and the
aorta: through it extend many numerous veins at its junction with the
intestines, reaching from above downwards. This is the nature of the
œsophagus, trachea, and the parts of the abdominal cavity.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. The heart has three cavities: it lies above the lungs, near the
division of the trachea. It has a fat and thick membrane, by which it
is united to the great vein and the aorta, and it lies upon the aorta
near the apex; and the apex is placed in the same situation in all
animals which have a chest; and in all animals, whether they have or
have not a chest, the apex of the heart is forwards, though it often
escapes notice by the change of position in the parts when dissected.
The gibbous portion of the heart is upwards; its apex is generally
fleshy and thick, and there is a sinew in the cavities.

2. In all other animals which have a chest the heart is placed in
the centre; in man it is rather on the left side, inclining a little
from the division of the mammæ towards the left breast in the upper
part of the chest; it is not large; its whole form is not long, but
rather round, except that the extremity ends in a point. It has three
cavities, as I have said. The greatest is that on the right, the least
on the left, the middle one is of intermediate size. They are all
perforated towards the lungs. It has both the two smaller, and all of
them perforated towards the lungs, and this is evident in one of the
cavities downwards from its point of attachment.

3. Near the principal cavity it is attached to the great vein to which
also the mesenterium is united, and in the middle it is attached to the
aorta. Passages lead from the lungs to the heart, and they are divided
in the same way as the trachea, following the passages from the trachea
throughout the whole lungs, and the passages leading from the heart are
on the upper part. There is no passage which is common to them both,
but by their union they receive the breath and transmit it through the
heart; for one of the passages leads to the right cavity, and the other
to the left. We will hereafter speak of the great vein and the aorta in
the portion of our work which treats of these parts.

4. In all animals which have lungs and are viviparous, either
internally or externally, the lung has more blood than all the other
parts; for the whole lung is spongy, and through each perforation
branches of the great vein proceed. Those persons are deceived who
say that the lungs are empty, drawing their conclusion from dissected
animals, from which all the blood has escaped. Of all the viscera the
heart alone contains blood, and in the lungs the blood is not in the
lungs themselves, but in the veins by which they are perforated. But in
the heart itself the blood is in each of the cavities, but the thinnest
blood is in the middle cavity.

5. Beneath the lungs is that division of the trunk which is called the
diaphragm. It is united to the ribs, the hypochondriac region, and the
spine. In the centre is a smooth membranous part, and there are veins
extending through it. The human veins are thick in proportion to the
size of the body. Under the diaphragm, on the right side is the liver,
on the left the spleen, alike in all animals which are furnished with
these parts in their natural form and without monstrosity, for already
there has been observed an altered order in some quadrupeds. They are
joined to the abdomen near the omentum.

6. The appearance of the human spleen is narrow and long, like that
of the hog. Generally speaking, and in most animals, the liver is not
furnished with a gall, though this is found in some animals. The human
liver is round, like that of the ox. This is the case also in animals
offered for sacrifice, as in the district of Chalcis, in Eubœa, where
the sheep have no gall, and in Naxos it is so large in nearly all the
animals, that strangers who come to sacrifice are surprised, and think
that it is ominous, and not at all natural. The liver is united with
the great vein, but has no part in common with the aorta. For a vein
branches off from the great vein through the liver, at the place where
the gates of the liver, as they are called, are situated. The spleen
also is only connected with the great vein, for a vein extends from
this to the spleen.

7. Next to these are the kidneys, which lie close to the spine. In
their nature they are like the kidneys of oxen. In all animals that
have kidneys the right kidney lies higher than the left, and is covered
with less fat, and is more dry than the left. This is the same in all
animals. Passages lead from them to the great vein and to the aorta,
but not to the cavity; for all animals, except the seal, have a cavity
in their kidneys, though it is greater in some than in others. The
human kidneys; though similar to those of oxen, are more solid than in
other animals, and the passages that lead to them end in the body of
the kidney; and this is a proof that they do not pass through them,
that they contain no blood in the living animal, nor is it coagulated
in them when dead; but they have a small cavity, as I said before. From
the cavity of the kidneys two strong passages lead to the bladder, and
two others, strong and continuous, lead to the aorta.

8. A hollow, sinewy vein is attached to the middle of each kidney,
which extends from the spine through small branches, and disappears
towards the hip, though it afterwards appears again upon the hip. The
branches of these veins reach to the bladder; for the bladder is placed
lowest of all, being united to the passages which proceed from the
kidneys by the neck which reaches to the urethra; and nearly all round
its circumference it is united by smooth and muscular membranes, very
similar in form to those upon the diaphragm of the chest.

9. The human bladder is moderately large in size, and the pudendum is
united to the neck of the bladder, having a strong passage above and
a small one below. One of these passages leads to the testicles; the
other, which is sinewy and cartilaginous, to the bladder. From this are
appended the testicles of the male, concerning which we will treat in
the part devoted to their consideration. These parts are the same in
the female, who differs in none of the internal parts except the womb,
the appearance of which may be learned from the drawings in the books
on anatomy. Its position is upon the entrails. The bladder is above
the uterus. In a future book we will speak of the nature of the uterus
generally; for it is not alike, nor has it the same nature in them all.

These are the internal and external parts of the human body, and this
is their nature and their manner.




BOOK THE SECOND.


CHAPTER I.

1. Of the parts of other animals some are common to them all, as I have
said before, and some belong to particular classes, and they agree and
differ in the manner often before mentioned. For almost all animals
which differ in kind, have also their parts different in form, and
there are some which have only a proportionate resemblance, but differ
in kind, and others agree in kind, but not in form, and many parts
belong to some which others have not. Viviparous quadrupeds have a head
and neck, and all the parts of the head, but they differ from each
other in their forms. The lion has one bone in the neck, but has no
vertebræ, and when laid open its internal parts are like those of a dog.

2. Viviparous quadrupeds have fore-legs instead of arms, and in all
quadrupeds, especially those which have the fore-feet much divided,
they are analogous to hands, for they use them as hands, and the left
legs are less at liberty than in men, except in the elephant, and this
animal has the toes less perfectly jointed, and its fore-legs much
larger than the hind ones; it has five toes, and short ankles to its
hind legs. It has a trunk of such a nature and length as to be able to
use it for a hand, and it drinks and eats by stretching this into its
mouth; this also it lifts up to its driver, and pulls up trees with
it; with this organ it breathes as it walks through the water. The
extremity of the proboscis is curved, but without joints, for it is
cartilaginous.

3. Man is the only ambidextrous animal. All animals have their chest
analogous to man, but not similar to his, for he has a wide chest, and
theirs is narrow: no animal but man has pectoral mammæ; the elephant
has two mammæ, but not on the breast, though they are in that direction.

4. All animals, excepting the elephant, bend both their fore and hind
legs in contrary directions, and also contrary to the way in which
a man's limbs are bent. For in viviparous quadrupeds, except the
elephant, the joints of the fore-legs are bent forwards, and those
of the hind-legs backwards, and they have the hollow part of their
circumference opposite to each other: the elephant is not constructed
as some have said, but is able to sit down, and bend his legs, but,
from his great weight, is unable to bend them on both sides at once,
but leans either to the right side or the left, and sleeps in this
position, but its hind legs are bent like a man's.

5. In oviparous quadrupeds, as the crocodile, lizard, and such like,
both the fore and hind legs are bent forwards, inclining a little to
the side, and likewise also in other animals with more than four feet,
except that the middle joint of their last pair of legs is always
doubtful, and is rather bent towards the side. And man also has both
the flexures of his limbs in the same direction, and those of his arms
and legs contrary to each other, for he bends the arm backwards, except
that the external part of the arm is a little inclined inwards, towards
the side; the legs bend forwards.

6. No animal bends the joints both of its fore and hind legs backwards.
The flexure of the cubitus and fore-leg is in a contrary direction to
the flexure of the shoulder in all animals, and the flexure of the knee
is contrary to that of the hip; so that since man bends his joints in
the contrary direction to many animals, those which have such joints
as man's also bend them in a contrary direction to many animals. Birds
bend their limbs in a direction similar to that of quadrupeds, for
being bipeds, they bend their legs backwards, and have wings instead of
arms, or fore-legs, and these bend forwards.

7. The seal is like a maimed quadruped, for immediately beneath the
scapula it has feet like hands, as are also those of the bear, for
they are five-fingered, and each of the fingers has three joints, and
a small claw: the hind feet are five-fingered, and each of the fingers
has joints and claws like those upon the fore-feet; in shape they are
very like the tail of a fish.

8. The movements of animals, whether they have four feet or more, are
in the direction of the longer diameter of their bodies, and thus also
they stand, the commencement of motion is always on the right side of
their bodies. The lion and the camel, both the Arabian and Bactrian,
walk with the hind-foot following the fore-foot on the same side, and
this means that the right foot is not put before the left, but follows
it.


CHAPTER II.

1. Whatever parts a man has before, a quadruped has beneath: those that
are behind in man, form the quadruped's back; most animals have a tail,
the seal has a small one, like that of a stag; hereafter we shall speak
of apelike animals. All viviparous quadrupeds are, so to say, rough,
with hair, and not like man, who, except on his head, has not much hair
on his body, and what there is, is very fine; but his head is more
massy than that of other animals.

2. And all creatures that have their upper part rough with hair, are
quite smooth, or only slightly rough beneath; but man is contrary to
this: and again, each eyelid in man is furnished, with lashes, and he
has hair on the cheek, and pubes; other animals are not so furnished,
having no hair on the lower eyelid, or only a few hairs under the
eyelid.

3. But some hairy quadrupeds are rough all over, as the hog, the bear,
and the dog; the neck of others is the roughest part, as in those which
have a mane, like the lion; in others which have a mane, the back of
the neck from the head to the point of the shoulder is hairy, as the
horse and the mule, and among wild animals with horns, the bonassus.
The hipellaphus,[31] as it is called, has a mane upon the point of its
shoulder, and so has the pardium,[32] though both these have a thin
mane from the head to the shoulder, and the hipellaphus has a beard
upon its larynx.

[31] Perhaps Nylghau (Liddel and Scott's Lexicon), or some large kind
of Stag.

[32] Cameleopard. (Schneider.)

4. Both of these are horned, and have a cloven hoof: the female
hipellaphus has no horns, it is about the size of a stag; there are
hipellaphi in the country of the Arachotæ, where also are buffaloes.
The wild differ as much from domesticated oxen, as wild hogs from tame
ones; for they are black, and of great strength; their nose is curved
like an eagle's beak, and their horns lie backwards; the horns of
the hipellaphus are very like those of the dorcas:[33] the elephant
is the least hairy of all quadrupeds. The tails of animals are like
their bodies in roughness, and smoothness, in as many as have tails in
proportion to their size, for some have very small tails.

[33] Gazelle or antelope, so named from the brightness of its eyes.

5. Camels have a part peculiar to themselves, called the hump upon
the back; the Bactrian camel differs from the Arabian; the one has two
humps, the other but one; and they have another hump below, like the
one on their back, upon which the rest of their body is supported, when
they go down upon their knees. The camel has four mammæ, like the cow,
and a tail like an ass, and the pudendum is behind; it has but one knee
in each leg, and not many joints, as some persons say; this appearance
arises from the position of the abdomen. It has a talus like that of an
ox, misshapen, and small in proportion to its size.

6. The hoof is cloven; it has not teeth in both jaws. The cloven hoof
is formed in this manner; the lower part is somewhat cloven, as far
as the second joint of the toes, but the upper part is four-cleft as
far as the first joint of the toes; there is a membrane uniting the
cloven parts as in geese, the foot is fleshy underneath like that of
a bear, wherefore, when camels are used in war, and become footsore,
their drivers put them on leather shoes. All quadrupeds have their legs
bony and sinewy and without flesh, that is all animals with feet are so
formed, excepting man, and they are without hips; this is particularly
the case with birds. But on the contrary, the hips, thighs, and legs of
man are more fleshy than almost any other part of his body, for even
the calf of his leg is fleshy.

7. Some sanguineous and viviparous quadrupeds have many divisions in
the foot, like the hands and feet of man; for some, as the lion, the
dog, and the panther, have many divisions of the foot; others are
cloven-footed, and instead of nails have hoofs, as the sheep, the
goat, the stag, and the river-horse. Some are without divisions in the
foot, as the solidunguli, the horse, and the mule. The genus of swine
belongs to both classes; for in Illyria, Pæonia, and other places,
there are swine with a solid hoof. Those with a two-cleft hoof have
two divisions, before and behind; in those with a solid hoof this is
continuous.

8. Some animals have horns, others have none; most of those with horns
have also cloven feet, as the ox, the stag, and the goat. We have never
seen an animal with a solid hoof with two horns, and there are only a
few that have a solid hoof and one horn, as the Indian ass, and the
oryx.[34] Of all animals with a solid hoof, the Indian ass alone has
a talus. Swine, as I said before, belong to both classes, so that they
have not a well-formed astragulus.

[34] Antelope Oryx.

9. Many animals with cloven hoofs have a talus; no animals with their
feet in many divisions have a talus, nor has man. The lynx has as it
were half a talus, and so has the lion, but it is more intricate, as
some pretend. The talus is always in the hind leg, and it is placed
upright upon the gamb, with the lower part outwards, and the upper part
inwards; the parts called Coa[35] turned inwards towards each other,
and the Chia turned outwards, and the projecting portions upwards. This
is the position of the talus, in all animals which are furnished with
this part. Some animals have a cloven hoof, and a mane, and two horns
turned towards each other, as the bonassus, an animal which inhabits
the country between Pæonia and Media.

[35] Coa, the highest throw with the Astragalus with the convex side
uppermost, opposed to Chia, the lowest throw, sixes and aces.

10. All animals with horns are four-footed, unless there is any animal
which metaphorically, and for the sake of a word, is said to have
horns, as they say that the serpents in the neighbourhood of Thebes in
Egypt have, though it is nothing more than an appendage, that is called
a horn. The stag is the only animal that has solid horns, the horns of
all other animals are hollow for a part of their length, and solid at
the extremity; the hollow part is principally formed of skin, and round
this is arranged the solid part, as in the horns of oxen. The stag is
the only animal which casts its horns; they are reproduced; this takes
place every year after the animal has attained the age of two years;
other animals never lose their horns unless destroyed by violence.


CHAPTER III.

1. The parts of the mammæ also, and the organs of generation, are
different in man and in other animals. For some have the mammæ forward
on or near the breast, and two mammæ with two nipples, as man and the
elephant, as I said before, for the elephant has two mammæ near the
arm-pits; in the female they are small, and do not bear any proportion
to the size of the animal, so that they are scarcely visible in a side
view; the males also have mammæ as well as the females, but they are
exceedingly small.

2. The bear has four, other animals have two mammæ upon the thighs,
and two nipples like sheep; others have four nipples, as the cow; some
animals have not their nipples on the breast and thighs, but on the
abdomen, as the dog and the hog, they have many nipples, but not all of
the same size; other animals also have more than two, as the panther,
which has four on the abdomen; the lioness has two on the abdomen, the
camel has two mammæ and four nipples, like the cow.

3. Among animals with a solid hoof the males have no mammæ, except some
horses which bear a resemblance to their dams. Some males have the
penis external, as man, and the horse, and many others; some internal,
as the dolphin. Of those animals in which it is external, some have it
in front, as those which I have named; and some of these have both the
penis and testicles loose, as in man; others have them close to the
abdomen; some have them more, others less loose, for this part is not
equally free in the boar and the horse.

4. The elephant has a penis like a horse, but small and less in
proportion to the size of its body; its testicles are not external but
internal, and near the kidneys, wherefore also the work of copulation
is quickly performed. The female has the pudendum in the same position
as the udder of the sheep, and when excited with desire, it is lifted
up outwards, so as to be ready for copulation with the male; and the
orifice of the pudendum is very wide. Most animals have the penis in
the same direction, but some are retromingent, as the lynx, lion,
camel, and hare. In some males, as I have said, the direction of the
penis is different, but all females are retromingent, for even in the
female elephant the pudendum is placed under the thighs, as in other
animals.

5. The penis is very different in different animals, for in some it is
cartilaginous and fleshy, as in man; the fleshy part does not swell,
but the cartilaginous portion is erected; in others it is sinewy, as
the camel and the stag; in others it is bony, as the fox and the wolf,
the weasel and the martin, for the martin also has a bony penis.

6. Again, man being a perfect animal, has the upper part of his
body less than the lower part; the contrary is the case with other
sanguineous animals: by the upper portion of his body we mean the
portion of his body from the head to the anus, and by the lower,
the parts from hence downwards. In those animals which have feet the
hind leg is the lower part of the body in point of size; and in those
without legs, the same relation is observed in their various kinds of
tails. Such is the nature of perfected animals, but they differ in the
development of their parts. Man in the young state has the upper part
of his body greater than the lower; but as he grows the proportion of
his parts changes, wherefore also he is the only animal which does not
move in the same way when young and when grown up, for at first a child
crawls like a four-footed animal.

7. Some animals grow in the same proportion throughout, as the
dog--others when they are first born have their upper part
proportionally less than the lower, but as they approach maturity, the
upper parts increase in size, as in the lophuri, for in these animals
the part from the hoof to the haunch never grows after their birth.

8. There is a great difference in the teeth of animals, both among
themselves and from the human type; all viviparous and sanguineous
quadrupeds have teeth; some have teeth in both jaws, which others have
not; this is the first distinction. Those which have horns do not
possess teeth in both jaws, for they have no front teeth in the upper
jaw. There are others, as the camel, which, though it has no horns, has
not teeth in the upper jaw.

9. Some animals have tusks like the boar, others have not; some have
pointed teeth, as the lion, panther, and dog; the teeth of others have
an even surface, as the ox and the horse. Animals with pointed teeth
have their teeth fitting into each other; no animal has both tusks and
horns, neither those with pointed teeth nor any others. Most animals
have their front teeth sharp, and their hind teeth flat; all the teeth
of the seal are sharp pointed, showing an approximation to the race of
fishes, for all fishes have pointed teeth.

10. None of these genera have a double row of teeth. But, if we may
believe Ctesias, there are some which have this peculiarity, for he
mentions an Indian animal called martichora, which had three rows of
teeth in each jaw; it is as large and as rough as a lion, and has
similar feet, but its ears and face are like those of a man; its eye is
grey, and its body red; it has a tail like a land scorpion, in which
there is a sting; it darts forth the spines with which it is covered
instead of hair, and it utters a noise resembling the united sound of
a pipe and a trumpet; it is not less swift of foot than a stag, and is
wild, and devours men.

11. Man sheds his teeth, and so do other animals, as the horse, the
mule, and the ass; man sheds his front teeth, but no animal sheds the
molar teeth; swine do not shed any of their teeth. About dogs, there
is some doubt; some persons think they do not shed their teeth at all,
others that they shed only the canine teeth; but it has been observed
that they do shed their teeth like men: perhaps it has escaped notice,
because they do not shed them before the inner ones, which are similar,
are grown up.

12. And it is probable that the same takes place in other wild animals,
since they are said only to shed their canine teeth. Young dogs are
known from old ones by their teeth, for young dogs have sharp white
teeth, old dogs have them black and blunted. The horse is in this
respect different from all other animals; for while the teeth in other
animals become darker as they grow older, in the horse they become more
white.

13. Those which are called canine teeth are placed between the cutting
and the molar teeth, and partake of the nature of both, for they are
wide below, but sharp at the top. The male has more teeth than the
female in mankind, and sheep, and goats, and swine. This has not been
observed in other animals. Those persons which have the greatest number
of teeth are the longest lived; those which have them widely separated,
smaller, and more scattered, are generally more short lived.

14. The last molar teeth, which are called wisdom teeth, appear, both
in the male and female about the age of twenty, and some women cut the
molar teeth at eighty years of age, causing great pain in the extremity
of the jaw, and some men also: this happens with persons who do not cut
their wise teeth at the proper age.

15. The elephant has four teeth on each side, with which he grinds his
food, for he reduces his food very small, like meal. Besides these,
he has two tusks: in the male these are large, and turned upwards; in
the female they are small, and bent in the contrary direction. The
elephant has teeth as soon as it is born; but the tusks are small, and
therefore inconspicuous at first. It has so small a tongue within its
mouth, that it is difficult to see it.


CHAPTER IV.

1. Animals have very differently-sized mouths, for some have wide, open
mouths, as the dog, the lion, and all animals with pointed teeth; other
animals have a small mouth, as man, or a moderately-sized one, as the
swine. The Egyptian river-horse has a mane like a horse, and a cloven
hoof like the ox; it has a flat face; the talus is like that of other
animals with cloven hoofs, and it has large projecting teeth; it has a
tail like a hog, and utters a sound like the neighing of a horse; it
is about the size of an ass, and its skin is so thick that shields are
made of it; its intestines are like those of a horse or ass.


CHAPTER V.

1. Some animals unite in their nature the characteristics of man and
quadrupeds, as apes, monkeys, and cynocephali. The monkey is an ape
with a tail; cynocephali have the same form as apes, but are larger and
stronger, and their faces are more like dogs' faces; they are naturally
fierce, and their teeth are more like dogs' teeth, and stronger than in
other genera.

2. The apes are hairy in their upper parts, so as to bear some
resemblance to quadrupeds, and also in the lower, because they are like
men, for in this particular, as I said before, there is a difference
in men and brutes; their hair is coarse, and apes are rough both above
and below. They bear a strong likeness to men in their face, for their
nostrils, ears, and teeth, both the fore and back teeth, are like his;
and as for eye-lashes, though other animals are entirely without them,
the ape has them on the lower eye-lid; they are, however, very thin,
and altogether small.

3. Upon the breast are two small mammæ, with two nipples; the arms are
like those of man, but hairy; both the arms and legs are bent like
those of man, the curves of the limbs being turned towards each other.
Besides these, it has hands, fingers, and nails like those of man, but
all indicating an approximation to the brute; their feet are peculiar,
for they are like great hands. The fingers upon them are like those
on the hands, and the middle one is the longest; the sole of the foot
is like a hand, except that it extends the whole length of the hand
like a palm, and is hard at the extremity, and is a bad and obscure
representation of a heel.

4. The feet are used for both the purposes of hands and feet, and are
bent like hands. The humerus and the femur are short compared with the
cubitus and the leg. The navel is not prominent, and there is a hard
place about the region of the navel. Like quadrupeds, the upper part
of the body is much larger than the lower, almost in the proportion of
five to three, and the feet are like hands, and as it were made up of
hands and feet, a foot as far as the extremity of the heel, and the
remainder like a hand, for the fingers are furnished with something
like a palm.

5. The ape passes more of its time as a quadruped than a biped, and
like a quadruped, it has no nates, nor has it a tail like a biped, but
only something in representation of a tail. The pudendum of the female
resembles that of a woman; that of the male is more like a dog's. The
monkey, as I said before, has a tail, and all the internal parts of the
body are like those of man. The external parts of viviparous quadrupeds
are of this nature.


CHAPTER VI.

1. Oviparous and sanguineous quadrupeds (for no sanguineous land animal
that is not either a quadruped or apodal is oviparous) have a head,
neck, back, upper and lower parts of the body, and fore and hind legs,
and something resembling a breast, like oviparous quadrupeds: most of
them also have a large tail, some a small one; all of them have many
toes and divided feet, and all the organs of sense, and a tongue,
except the Egyptian crocodile. And in this respect it resembles some
fishes, for the tongue of fishes is thorny, and not free, and in some
the place for the tongue is altogether smooth, and without division (so
that nothing is visible), unless the lips are drawn aside.

2. They have no ears, only a passage for hearing; neither have they any
mammæ, and the penis and testicles are internal, and not external. They
have no hair, but are covered with scales, and all are furnished with
sharp teeth. The river-crocodiles have eyes like hogs, and great sharp
teeth, strong claws, and an unbroken scaly skin. In the water their
sight is imperfect, but very good on land. They pass the greatest part
of the day on land, and of the night in the water, for they cannot bear
the cold air.


CHAPTER VII.

1. The chameleon has the whole of its body like that of a lizard, and
the ribs, descending downwards, are joined together on the hypogastric
region, like those of fish, and the back-bone stands up, like that of
a fish; its face is like that of the chœropithecus.[36] It has a very
long tail; the extremity is very smooth, and rolled together like a
thong. It is raised, upon longer legs than a lizard; the joints of the
legs are bent in the same direction as the lizard's.

[36] Simia rostrata, or perhaps baboon. (_The identifications of the
animals, unless otherwise noted, are taken from the German translation
by Strack_, 1816.)

2. Each of its feet is divided into two parts, having the same relation
to each other as our thumbs have to the rest of the hand: and, for a
short distance, each of these is divided into toes; in the fore-feet
the internal part has three, the external two toes; in the hind feet
the internal part has two, and the external three toes; there is a claw
upon each of its toes like that of birds of prey; its whole body is
rough, like the crocodile.

3. Its eyes are placed in a hollow, and are very large and round;
surrounded with skin like the rest of its body, and in the middle is
left a small aperture through which it sees; this is never covered with
skin. The eye is turned round in a circle, and it can direct its vision
to any side, so that it can see where it will. The change in the colour
of its skin takes place when it is filled with air. It can acquire
either a black colour, like that of the crocodile, or ochreous, like
that of the lizard, or spotted with black, like the panther; and this
change takes place over the whole body, for the eyes also change like
the rest of the body, and so does the tail.

4. Its movements are slow, like those of the tortoise; when dying, it
becomes ochreous, and retains this colour after death. The œsophagus
and trachea of the chameleon are similar to the same parts in lizards;
it has no flesh, except a little on the head and cheeks, and upon the
appendage at the end of its tail. It has no blood, except about the
heart, and eyes, and the parts above the heart, and the veins that
extend from these: and even in these there is very little blood.

5. The brain lies a little above the eyes, and is continuous with them;
and when the outside skin of the eye is taken away, a bright object
shines through it, like a bright ring of brass. Through the whole of
its body many strong membranes are extended, which are much stronger
than in other animals. It breathes strongly for some time after it has
been dissected, and there are some slight movements of the heart; it
also continues to contract its sides, but not the other parts of the
body. It has no distinct spleen; and it hides itself in rocks like the
lizard.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. Birds also have many parts like the animals described above. For
all these have a head, neck, back, and under parts of the body, and
something resembling a breast. They have two legs, and thus resemble
men more than other animals, except that the joints bend backwards like
those of quadrupeds, as I said before. They have neither hands, nor
fore-feet, but wings; herein they differ from all other animals. Again,
the hip is like a thigh, large and united as far as the middle of the
abdomen, so as to look like a thigh, when it is separated from the rest
of the body; and the thigh where it is joined to the leg is another
part. The class of birds with crooked claws have the largest thigh, and
stronger breasts than others.

2. All birds have claws and many divisions of the foot; in most of
them the toes are quite separate; but the swimmers have their feet
covered with a web, but even these have distinct and jointed toes. All
birds that fly high in the air have four toes; and, generally, these
are placed three forwards, and one backward, like a heel; a few birds
have two toes turned forwards and two backwards, as the bird called
jynx.[37] This bird is somewhat larger than the spize,[38] and is
variegated in appearance. The formation of its toes is peculiar, and so
is that of its tongue, which is like a serpent's. This it can project
from its mouth, as much as the width of four fingers, and draw it in
again. Like a snake it can turn its neck quite round, whilst the rest
of its body is perfectly still. It has large claws, like those of the
colius,[39] and it hisses with its voice.

[37] Jynx torquilla, wry-neck.

[38] Fringilla, finch.

[39] Perhaps Corvus galgulus.

3. Birds have a mouth, but its construction is peculiar, for they have
neither lips nor teeth, but a beak, and neither ears nor nostrils, but
only passages for these organs, for the nostrils in the beak, and for
the ears in the head. They have two eyes like other animals, without
eyelashes; when heavy with sleep, they close their eyes with the lower
eyelid; and all possess a nictitating membrane, which closes the eye.
The owl-like birds also use the upper eyelid. The same is the nature of
the scaly animals, as the saurians, and others of this class; all of
them close their eyes with the lower eyelid, but they do not all wink
like birds. Again, birds have neither scales nor hair, but feathers;
all the feathers have a stem.

4. Birds have no tail, but a rump; in birds with long legs, or palmated
feet, this is short, in others it is large. These last, when they
fly, keep their legs close to the body, but the others stretch them
out behind them. All birds have a tongue, but this differs in various
kinds: some have it large, others small. Next after man, some birds
articulate words better than any other animals; this is particularly
the case with those with broad tongues. No oviparous animal has an
epiglottis on its trachea: but it can close and open the passage, so as
to prevent any heavy thing finding its way into the lungs.

5. Some tribes of birds have spurs; this is never the case with those
which have crooked claws. Those with crooked claws are more active in
flight; those which have spurs, are heavier in their make.

6. Some birds have a crest, mostly formed of erect feathers; the
domestic fowl, alone, is peculiar, for its crest is neither flesh, nor
very unlike flesh.


CHAPTER IX.

1. Among aquatic animals, there is one class of fish, which embraces
many forms, and is separated from other animals, for it has a head, and
upper and lower parts, in which last are the stomach and bowels, and
a continuous and undivided tail. This is not alike in all. They have
neither neck nor limb, nor internal and external testicles, nor mammæ,
nor has any other animal mammæ that is not viviparous, nor indeed all
viviparous animals, but those only that are internally viviparous, and
not first of all oviparous. For the dolphin is a viviparous animal,
wherefore it has two mammæ, not indeed above, but near the organs of
reproduction. It has not evident nipples, but, as it were, a stream
flowing from each side. From these the milk exudes, and the young ones
suck as they follow the mother. This has been distinctly observed by
some persons.

2. But fish, as we have observed, have neither mammæ nor any external
passage for the genital organs. In the branchia they have a distinctive
organ, through which they eject the water they have received into their
mouths; and they have fins, most fishes have four, but the long fishes,
as the eel, have only two placed near the branchia, and in this respect
the cestreus,[40] a fish in the lake of Siphæ, is similar to the
eel,[41] and so is the fish called tænia.[42] Some of these long fish
have no fins, as the muræna, nor have they divided branchia like other
fish.

[40] Mugil, mullet.

[41] Muræna anguilla.

[42] Perhaps Cepola tænia.

3. Some fish with branchia have coverings over their branchi; in
all the cartilaginous fishes they are uncovered. All fishes that
have coverings have the branchia placed on their sides; among the
cartilaginous fishes some are broad in the lowest part, as the
narce[43] and the batos;[44] some very long in the sides, as all the
galeodea.[45] In the batracus,[46] although the branchia are on the
sides, they are covered with a coriaceous, not a prickly membrane, like
those of fishes which are not cartilaginous.

[43] Raia torpedo.

[44] Raia batos.

[45] The shark tribe.

[46] Lophius piscatorius.

4. In some fishes with branchia they are single, in others double, but
the last towards the body is always single. Some have but few branchia,
others have many; but their number is always equal on both sides, and
those with the smallest number have always one on each side; this is
double in the capros;[47] others have two on each side, sometimes these
are single, sometimes double, as in the conger[48] and the scarus;[49]
others have four simple branchia on each side, as the ellops,[50]
synagris, muræna, and eel; others have four, all divided except the
last, as the cichle,[51] perca,[52] glanis,[53] and cyprinus;[54] all
the galeodea have five double branchia on each side, the xiphias[55]
has eight, which are double. This is the manner and number of the
branchia of fishes.

[47] Perhaps Cottus cataphractus.

[48] Muræna conger.

[49] Scarus cretensis.

[50] Swordfish or sturgeon (L. and S. Lexicon), or Centriscus scolopax.

[51] A variegated fish.

[52] Perca fluviatilis.

[53] Silurus glanis.

[54] Cyprinus carpis, Carp.

[55] Xiphias gladius, Swordfish.

5. And fish differ in other respects besides their gills, for they have
no hair like viviparous quadrupeds, nor scaly plates like oviparous
quadrupeds, nor feathers like birds, but the greater number of them are
covered with scales; some of them are rough, and a very few are smooth.
Some cartilaginous fishes are rough, others smooth. Congers, eels, and
tunnies are smooth. All fish except the scarus have pointed teeth,
and all have sharp teeth, some several rows of them, and teeth on the
tongue; they have also a hard prickly tongue, so united to the mouth as
sometimes to appear without a tongue.

6. The mouth of some fishes is wide, like viviparous quadrupeds. They
have no external organs of sense, nor even passages for smelling or
hearing; but all have eyes without eyelids, though their eyes are
not hard. All fishes are sanguineous; some are oviparous, others
viviparous; all those that are covered with scales are oviparous. The
cartilaginous fishes are all viviparous, except the batrachus.


CHAPTER X.

1. The remaining class of sanguineous animals is that of serpents;
these partake of both characters. The greater portion of them inhabit
the land, a few inhabiting water are found in rivers. There are also
serpents in the sea very like those on land, except in their head,
which is more like that of the conger. There are many genera of
sea-serpents, and they are of all kinds of colours; they do not exist
in the deepest part of the ocean. Serpents are apodal, like fishes.

2. There are also marine scolopendræ,[56] very like those on land, but
rather less; they live in rocky places; in colour they are redder, and
they have more feet, and slighter legs than in the terrestrial species.
These also, like the serpents, are not found in deep places.

[56] Nereis, or aphrodite.

3. And there is a small fish which lives among the rocks, which some
call echineis;[57] some people use it for trials and philtres; it is
not fit for food. Some people say it has feet, but it has none; the
fins, however, are like feet, which gives it this appearance. I have
now described the external parts of sanguineous animals, their nature,
and their number, and the differences which occur amongst them.

[57] Echeneis remora.


CHAPTER XI.

1. First of all we will speak of the internal parts of sanguineous
animals, for the greatest number of genera differ from other animals,
some being sanguineous, others ex-sanguineous. The sanguineous genera
are man, viviparous and oviparous quadrupeds, birds, fishes, and
whales, and perhaps others that are anonymous, because they do not form
a genus, but simply species amongst each other, as the serpent and the
crocodile.

2. All viviparous quadrupeds have an œsophagus and trachea, situated
as in man, and so have oviparous quadrupeds and birds, though there
is some difference in the formation of these parts; all that breathe
by inhaling and exhaling air have lungs, trachea, and œsophagus. The
position of the œsophagus and trachea, though similar, is not the same,
nor are the lungs alike in all, nor similar in position.

3. All sanguineous animals have a heart, and a division in the middle
of the body, called a diaphragm. In small animals its smallness and
thinness render it less apparent. The heart of the ox is peculiar; for
there is a kind of ox, though not the whole genus, which has a bone in
its heart, and there is also a bone in the heart of the horse.

4. Not all animals have lungs, fish and those with gills have no lungs.
All sanguineous animals have a liver, generally a spleen also; but
in oviparous animals that are not viviparous, the spleen is so small
as nearly to escape notice, as in most birds, the pigeon, kite,[58]
hawk,[59] and owl. The ægocephalus[60] has none at all. Oviparous
quadrupeds are of the same nature, for they have a very small spleen,
as the tortoise, emys,[61] phryne, lizard, crocodile, and frog.

[58] Falco milvus.

[59] Falco palurabarius.

[60] Stryx otus.

[61] Testudo coriacea.

5. Some animals have a gall upon the liver, others none. Among
viviparous quadrupeds the stag[62] has none, nor the deer,[63] horse,
mule, ass, seal, and some swine. The Achaïnian stag appears to have the
gall in the tail; that which they call gall in these animals resembles
it in colour, but it is not liquid like gall, but more like the spleen
in its internal structure.

[62] Cervus elaphus.

[63] Cervus capreolus, or C. Dama.

6. All, while they are alive, have worms[64] in the head; they are
produced in the hollow part under the hypoglottis, and near the
vertebræ, where the head is joined on. In size they resemble very large
maggots; they are numerous, and continuous, in number not generally
more than twenty. Stags, as I have observed, have no gall, but their
intestines are so bitter that dogs will not eat them if the deer are
fat.

[64] Possibly Œstras nasalis.

7. The elephant also has a liver without a gall, but when the part
where the gall is attached in other animals, is cut open, a quantity
of fluid like bile, more or less abundant, runs out. Among those
animals which inhale sea-water, and have lungs, the dolphin has no
gall. All birds and fishes have galls, and all oviparous quadrupeds,
to speak of them at once, have a gall, greater or less; but in some
fishes it is placed upon the liver, as the galeodea, glanis, rine,[65]
leiobatus,[66] narce, and in some long fish, as the eel, belone,[67]
and zygæna;[68] and the callionymus[69] has a gall upon the liver,
larger in proportion to its size than any other fish. Others have a
gall upon the intestines, extending from the liver by several thin
passages; the amia[70] has it stretched out upon the intestines, and
equal to them in length, and many times folded upon it. Other fish
have the gall upon the intestines, some at a greater, others at a less
distance, as the batrachus, elops, synagris, muræna, xiphias.

[65] Squalus squatina.

[66] Raia batos.

[67] Syngnathus acus.

[68] Squalus zygæna.

[69] Uranoscopus scaber.

[70] A kind of marked scomber, mackerel?

8. And the same genus often appears to have the gall extended in both
directions, as the conger, in some individuals it is turned towards
the liver, in others suspended before the liver. The same structure is
observed in birds, for some have the gall turned towards the stomach,
and others towards the entrails, as the pigeon, crow, quail, swallow,
sparrow; in others it is directed both towards the liver and the
stomach, as the ægocephalus; in others, as the hawk and kite, it is
directed towards the liver and the intestines.


CHAPTER XII.

1. All viviparous quadrupeds have kidneys and a bladder, but some
oviparous animals have neither, as birds and fishes, and among
oviparous quadrupeds the marine turtle is the only one that has them at
all proportionate to its size. The marine turtle has the kidneys like
those of oxen, and that of the ox is like a great many kidneys joined
together. In all its internal parts, the bonassus[71] is like the ox.

[71] Bos grunniens.

2. The position which these parts occupy is the same in all animals,
and the heart is in the middle of the body of all creatures, except
man. In him it is inclined towards the left side; and, as it was before
observed, the apex of the heart is directed forward in all, but in
fishes it does not appear to be so, for the apex of the heart is not
directed towards the chest, but towards the mouth and head, and the
top of the heart is suspended from the place where the right and left
branchia are joined to each other, and there are also other passages
which extend from the heart to each of the branchia, greater towards
the larger branchia, and less towards the smaller; but that to the top
of the heart in great fishes is a thick white tube.

3. A few fishes, as the conger and the eel, have an œsophagus, but even
in these it is very small; in some of the fish that have a liver, it is
placed on the right side, and has no lobes; in others, it is divided
from the commencement; and the greater part is on the right side. For
in some fish each part of the liver hangs down, and the divisions are
not united at their origin, as in the tribe of fish called galeodea,
and in a species of hare which is found near the lake of Bolba, in the
place called Sycine, and in other places, so that one might suppose
that they had two livers, on account of the distances at which the
passages unite, as in the lungs of birds.

4. In all animals the spleen is naturally situated on the left side.
The case has occurred that an animal having been opened, has been
observed to have the spleen on the right side and the liver on the
left, but such appearances are considered ominous. In all animals the
trachea reaches to the lungs (its nature will be described in another
place); and the œsophagus, in all that have this part, reaches to the
stomach through the diaphragm. For most fishes (as I observed before)
have no œsophagus, but the stomach is united directly with the mouth.
So that it often happens that, when great fishes are pursuing small
ones, the stomach falls forward into the mouth.

5. All the animals that have been mentioned have a stomach, and in
the same situation, for it is universally placed under the diaphragm,
and an intestine follows it, and ends in the exit for the food which
is called the anus. But the stomach of different animals is variously
formed, for in the first place viviparous horned quadrupeds, which have
not teeth in both jaws, have four such passages, and those animals are
said to ruminate. For the œsophagus, commencing in the mouth, extends
to the parts just below the lungs, and passes through the diaphragm to
the great stomach.

6. The internal part of this is rough, and folded together; and it is
united, near the junction of the stomach, to the part which, from its
appearance, is called the net, for the exterior is like a stomach, but
the inside resembles the meshes of a net; in point of size, the net is
much less than the stomach. Next to this is the part called echinus,
because internally it is rough and channelled; it is nearly the same
size as the net. Next to the echinus is the enystrum, which is both
larger and longer than the echinus, and internally covered with many
large and smooth folds; after this are the entrails.

7. This is the nature of the stomach of animals with horns, and no
teeth in the upper jaw. But they differ from each other in the form
and size of these parts; and because the œsophagus is sometimes united
to the middle, and sometimes to the side of the stomach. Most animals
which have teeth in both jaws have but one stomach, as the man, dog,
bear, lion, and the wolf. The thos[72] has all its intestines like a
wolf. All these have but one stomach, to which the bowel is united.
But in some of these the stomach is larger, as the hog and the bear;
that of the hog is marked with a few smooth lines. In other animals the
stomach is less, not indeed much larger than the intestine, as the dog,
lion, and man. In the forms of their bowels other animals are divided
into two classes, resembling these types; for in some the stomach
resembles a dog's, in others a hog's, both the greater and lesser
animals in the same way; and the stomachs of various animals differ in
size, form, thickness, thinness, and the position of the junction of
the œsophagus.

[72] Felis onza, perhaps also canis aureus.

8. And the nature of the bowels differs in the before-named animals,
those, namely, which have not, and those which have teeth in both
jaws, in size, thickness, and folding. The intestines of the ruminants
are all large, and so are the animals themselves; there are a few
small animals of this class, and there is no horned animal which is
very small. And some have appendages to the intestines, for none of
the animals with teeth in both jaws have straight intestines. There
are enlargements in the bowels of the elephant, which give it the
appearance of having four stomachs; in these the food is detained, and
apart from these there is no receptacle for the food. Its intestines
are very like those of the hog, except that the liver is four times
greater than that of the ox, and other parts also; the spleen is small
in proportion to its size.

9. The stomach and intestines of oviparous quadrupeds bear a similar
proportion to each other, as in the land and marine tortoise, the
lizard, and both kinds of crocodiles,[73] and similar quadrupeds; for
they have one simple stomach, in some it is like that of the hog, in
others like that of the dog.

[73] Crocodilus niloticus and Lacerta stellio.

10. The class of serpents in almost every part of their body resemble
the saurians, which have feet, and are oviparous, if we add to their
length, and take away the feet; for snakes are covered with scales,
and have their upper and lower parts like saurians, except that they
have no testicles, but, like fish, two passages united in one, and a
large and cloven uterus, but in other respects their intestines are so
like those of saurians, except that from their elongated figure their
intestines are long and narrow, that they might be mistaken for them,
from their similarity.

11. For the trachea is very long, and the œsophagus still longer, and
the commencement of the trachea is close to the mouth, so that the
tongue appears to lie beneath it. The trachea appears to be above the
tongue because this last can be retracted, and is not always in one
position, as in other animals. Their tongue is long, thin, and black,
and can be put forth for some distance. The tongue of serpents and
saurians is distinct from that of all other animals, for the extremity
of the tongue is cloven; this is most remarkable in serpents, for the
extremities of their tongues are like hairs. The seal also has a
forked tongue. The serpent has a stomach like a very wide entrail, like
that of the dog, afterwards a very long and thin intestine, which is
alike to its extremity.

12. Behind the pharynx is a small kidney-shaped heart, so that at
times the apex does not appear to be directed towards the chest, next
to this is a single lung, divided by a muscular passage, very long,
and descending a long distance from the breast. The liver is long and
simple, the spleen small and round, like that of the saurians. The gall
resembles that of fish, in water serpents it is situated on the liver,
in others generally upon the intestines. They all have pointed teeth,
and as many ribs as there are days in the month, for they have thirty.
Some persons say that in one respect serpents resemble the young of the
swallow, for if their eyes are pierced with a pointed instrument, they
will grow again, and if the tails of serpents or lizards be cut off,
they will be reproduced.

13. The same remarks will apply to the intestines and stomachs of
fishes, for they have one simple stomach, but it differs in form,
for in some fishes it is like a bowel, as in the one called scarus,
and this is the only fish that appears to ruminate, and the size of
the intestines is simple and folded together, for it can be resolved
into one, by unfolding it. The appendages of the stomach appear
to be peculiar to fishes and birds, for birds have them above the
stomach, and few in number, but in fish they are above, and around the
stomach. Some have many appendages, as the gobius,[74] galeus,[75]
perca, scorpios,[76] citharus,[77] trigla,[78] and sparus.[79] But
the cestreus has many on one side of the stomach, and only one on the
other. Some have only a few, as the hepatus[80] and the glaucus,[81]
and the chrysophrys[82] also has only a few, but some individuals
differ from others, for one chrysophrys has many, another has only
a few. There are some fish which have none of them, as most of the
cartilaginous genera; others have a few, and some a great many, and all
fish have these appendages very near the stomach itself.

[74] Gobio, gudgeon.

[75] Shark.

[76] Cottus scorpius.

[77] Probably Pleuronectes rhombus.

[78] Mullus surmulentus.

[79] Sparus maina.

[80] Theutis hepatus.

[81] Probably Gobio gozo.

[82] Sparus aurata.

14. Birds have their internal parts different from each other and from
other animals; for some have before the stomach a crop, as the domestic
fowl, pigeon, dove, and partridge. The crop is a large and hollow skin,
into which the food is received before it is digested. Hence from the
œsophagus it is narrower, then wider, and where it descends into the
stomach it is smaller.

15. In most birds the stomach is fleshy and thick, and on the outside
there is a strong skin, which is separated from the fleshy part. Some
birds have no crop, but instead of it a wide œsophagus, either wholly
so, or in the part extending to the stomach, as in the colœus,[83]
raven, and crow. The quail has the lower part of the œsophagus broad,
the ægocephalus has it small but wider, and so has the owl. But the
duck, goose, gull, diver, and bustard, have a wide and broad œsophagus,
and so have many other birds.

[83] Three kinds of birds are called by this name. Corvus graculus, C.
monedula, and Pelicanus graculus.

16. And some have a part of the stomach itself like a crop, as the
cenchreis;[84] and there are some which have neither œsophagus nor a
wide crop, but a large stomach; these are small birds like the swallow,
and the sparrow. A few have neither a crop, nor a wide œsophagus, but a
very long one; these are birds with a long neck, as the porphyrion.[85]
Almost all these emit a moister excrement than other birds.

[84] Falco tinnunculus.

[85] Fulica porphyrion.

17. The quail has these peculiarities, for it has a crop, and before
the stomach a wide and broad œsophagus. And the crop is at a great
distance from the part of the œsophagus before the belly, considering
the size of the bird. Birds have generally a small intestine, which
is single when unfolded, and birds have appendages, a few, as I have
said, and not placed above, as in fish, but below, near the end of the
intestine. Some birds have not these appendages, though they generally
have them, as the domestic fowl, partridge, duck, night-raven,[86]
localus,[87] ascalaphus,[88] goose, bustard, owl. Some of the small
birds have them, but they are very minute, as the sparrow.

[86] Ardea nycticorax.

[87] Some kind of heron.

[88] Some kind of owl.




BOOK THE THIRD.


CHAPTER I.

1. We have treated of the other internal parts of animals, their
number, their nature and varieties. It now remains for us to speak of
the organs of generation. In females these are always internal; but
there is much difference in males, for some sanguineous animals have
no testicles at all, in others they are internal; and in some animals
with internal testicles, they are placed near the kidneys, in others
near the abdomen; in other animals they are external. The penis of
these last is sometimes united to the abdomen, in others it is loose
as well as the testicles; but in promingent and retromingent animals
it is suspended from the abdomen in a different manner. Neither fish
nor any other animal with gills, nor the whole class of serpents,
have testicles; neither has any apodal animal which is not internally
viviparous.

2. Birds have testicles, but they are internal and near the loins, and
so have oviparous quadrupeds, as the lizard, tortoise, and crocodile,
and among viviparous animals, the hedgehog. In some viviparous animals
they are situated internally upon the abdomen, as the dolphin among
apodal creatures, and the elephant among quadrupeds. In other animals
the testicles are external. It has been previously observed, that the
manner and position of their junction with the abdomen is various, for
in some they are joined on and do not hang down, as in swine, in others
they hang down as in man.

3. It has also been observed that neither fishes nor serpents have
testicles, but they have two passages hanging down on each side of the
spine from the diaphragm, and these unite in one passage above the
anus, by above, we mean nearer the spinal column. At the season of
coition these passages are full of semen, which exudes on pressure;
the differences among these may be seen by dissection, and in another
place they will each be considered more particularly.

4. All oviparous animals, whether bipeds or quadrupeds, have their
testicles placed in the loins below the diaphragm, some of a white
colour, others ochreous, but in all surrounded with small veins; from
each of these a passage is produced, which afterwards become united in
one, and, as in fish, open near the anus. This is the penis, which is
inconspicuous in small animals; but in the larger, as the goose and
such like, it becomes more conspicuous immediately after coition.

5. And these passages, both in fish and other animals, are joined to
the loins below the stomach and between the entrails and the great
vein, from which passages proceed to each of the kidneys; and, as in
fish, the semen may be seen entering them at the period of coition,
when these passages become very conspicuous, but when this season is
passed the passages again become invisible. So also the testicles of
birds are either small or entirely invisible when not excited, but
when urged by desire they become very large; this is so remarkable in
pigeons and partridges, that some persons have supposed that they had
no testicles during winter.

6. In some of those animals in which the testicles are placed forwards,
they are internal and upon the abdomen, as in the dolphin; in others
they are externally conspicuous upon the extremity of the abdomen.
These animals are similar in other respects, but differ in this, for in
some the testicles are uncovered, and others that have external testes
they are placed in a scrotum.

7. This is the nature of the testicles of all viviparous animals with
feet: from the aorta, passages like veins proceed to the head of each
testicle, and two others from the kidneys, these last are full of
blood, but those from the aorta contain no blood. From the head of each
testicle to the testicle itself, there proceeds a thicker and more
muscular passage, which is in each testicle reflected back to the head
of the testicle, and from this point they again unite upon the penis
towards the fore-part of it.

8. And both these passages which are reflected back upon themselves,
and those which are seated upon the testicles, are covered with the
same membrane as the testes themselves, so that unless this membrane
is taken away, they all appear to be one passage. These last passages,
which are seated upon the testicle, contain sanguineous fluid, but less
than those above from the aorta; but in the reflected passages of the
duct which is upon the penis, the fluid is white. A passage also leads
from the bladder, and is united to the upper part of this duct, which
is enclosed in the part called the penis as in a husk. The accompanying
diagram will illustrate the position of these parts.

9. The origin of the passage from the trachea, _a_; the head of the
testes and the descending passages, _b b_; the passages which proceed
from these, and are seated upon the testicle, _c c_; the reflexed
passages which contain the white fluid, _d d_; the penis, _e_; the
bladder _f_; the testicles, _g g_. But when the testicles are cut out
or otherwise destroyed, the upper passages are retracted; in young
animals castration is performed by bruising the testicles, in older
animals by excision. And it has happened that a bull has begotten young
if admitted to the female immediately after castration. This is the
nature of the testicles of animals.

10. The uterus of the females that possess this organ is not of the
same nature, nor alike in all, but they differ from each other both in
viviparous and oviparous animals. The uterus is double in all those
animals in which it is situated near the external organ of generation,
one part lying on the right side, the other on the left, but the origin
is one, and there is but one os uteri, which is like a very fleshy
tube, and in most animals, especially those of a large size, it is
cartilaginous. One part of this organ is called the uterus and delphys
(whence the word adelphi, brothers), and the vagina and os uteri are
called metra.

11. In all viviparous animals, whether bipeds or quadrupeds, the
uterus is placed below the diaphragm, as in the human female, the
bitch, sow, mare, and cow, and it is the same in all horned animals.
At the extremity of the uterus most animals have a convoluted part
called the horns; these are not distinct in all oviparous animals; but
in some birds they are placed near the diaphragm, and in some fishes
below, as in the viviparous bipeds and quadrupeds. But they are thin,
membranaceous, and long, so that in very small fish each part of the
roe appears as one ovum, as if the fish which are said to have a
crumbling roe had but two ova, for it is not one ovum but many, and
therefore it may be resolved into many.

12. In the uterus of birds the vagina is below, fleshy and tough, but
the part near the diaphragm membranaceous and very thin, so that the
eggs appear to be outside the uterus. In large birds the membrane is
more conspicuous, and if inflated through the vagina, it swells and
enlarges at places; in small birds these parts are not conspicuous. The
uterus of oviparous quadrupeds, as the tortoise, lizard, frog, and such
like, is of the same nature, for the vagina below is one and fleshy,
but the division and the ova are higher up and near the diaphragm.

13. In those apodal creatures which are outwardly viviparous and
inwardly oviparous, as the sharks and selachea--[The selachea are
apodal, furnished with gills, and viviparous]--the uterus is divided,
and as in birds, it commences below and extends towards the diaphragm.
The ova are situated between the division, and above near the
diaphragm; and the animal is produced from the ovum after this has
descended into the open space.

14. The difference between the uteri of these fish and others may be
studied more accurately in drawings of dissections. Serpents also
differ much both among themselves and from other animals, for all
serpents except the viper are oviparous; this one is viviparous, though
at first internally oviparous, wherefore, in many respects, its uterus
resembles that of the cartilaginous fishes. The uterus of the serpent
is long, like the body, and descends downwards, beginning from one duct
and continuing on either side of the spine as far as the diaphragm, as
if each were a passage, in which the ova are placed in order; these ova
are not extruded singly, but connected together like a chain.

15. In all animals that are either internally or externally viviparous,
the uterus is situated above the abdomen; in all oviparous creatures it
is placed below, near the loins. Those that are externally viviparous,
but internally oviparous, partake of both characters, for the lower
part in which the ova are situated is near the loins, the other part
whence the ova are extruded above the intestines. And there is also
this difference in the uteri of animals: those which have horns and
not teeth in both jaws have cotyledons in the pregnant uterus, and some
of those also with teeth in both jaws, as the hare, the mouse, and the
bat. But other viviparous animals with teeth in both jaws, and with
feet, have a smooth uterus. The embryo is not united to the cotyledon,
but to the womb. This is the manner of the internal and external
heterogeneous parts of animals.


CHAPTER II.

1. Of the homogeneous parts of animals, the blood is common to
sanguineous animals; and so is the part in which it is contained, which
is called a vein; analogous to these, in exsanguineous animals are the
serum and the fibre. That which especially constitutes the body is
flesh or its analogue: the bone and its analogue; the spine and the
cartilage. Next to this we place the skin, membranes, sinews, hair,
nails, and their analogue; after these, adeps, fat, and excrementitious
matters; then are fæces, phlegm, and bile, both the yellow and the
black.

2. But inasmuch as the blood and the veins seem to occupy the chief
place, we will first of all speak of these, both for other reasons, and
because former writers do not appear to have described them rightly.
The difficulty of understanding them is the reason of their errors,
for in dead animals, the nature of the principal veins is obscure, for
they collapse as soon as the blood has escaped, and it pours out of
them as from a vessel. No part of the body, except the veins, contains
any blood, except the heart, which has a little; but it is all in the
veins. In living creatures their nature cannot be distinguished, for
they are internal, and out of sight; so that those who consider them
only in dead and dissected animals, cannot see their principal origins.
But some, by the examination of emaciated persons, have distinguished
the origin of the veins, from the appearance of those which are
external.

3. For Syennesis,[89] a Cyprian physician, speaks thus: "The larger
veins are thus constituted. From the navel around the loins, through
the back to the lungs, under the breasts; that from the right to the
left, and that from the left to the right. That from the left, through
the liver to the kidney and the testicle; that from the right to the
spleen, the kidney, and the testicle, and from thence to the penis."

[89] Syennesis, a physician of Cyprus. Very little is known of him; he
must have lived in or before the fourth century B.C.

4. Diogenes[90] of Apollonia writes thus: "The veins are thus placed in
man. There are two very large ones, which extend through the stomach by
the spine of the back, one to the right and the other to the left, each
to the leg nearest itself, and upwards to the head by the collar-bone,
and through the neck. From these great veins others extend through the
whole of the body, from the right to the right side, and from the left
to the left side. The largest are two from the heart, surrounding the
spine of the back; and others, a little higher up, through the breasts
under the arm-pits, each to the hand nearest itself; and the one is
called the splenetic, the other the hepatic vein.

[90] Diogenes of Apollonia was an eminent natural philosopher of Crete,
in the fifth century B.C. He wrote a work, περὶ φύσεως, in which he
treated of natural philosophy in the widest sense of the words: a few
fragments are still extant, of which this quoted by Aristotle is the
longest.

5. "The extremity of these veins is divided, one branch goes to the
thumb, and another to the wrist, and from these many small branches
are extended upon each hand, and the fingers; and others, smaller
still, branch off from these first veins, from the right side to the
liver, from the left to the spleen and kidneys. The veins, which go to
the legs, are divided near the junction, and extend through the whole
thigh; but the largest of these extends to the back of the thigh, and
appears thick; another, less thick, passes through the inside of the
thigh, and afterwards veins extend by the knee to the leg and foot. As
on the hands, they are distributed upon the tarsus of the foot, and
from thence to the toes.

6. "A number of small veins are distributed on the stomach and the
lungs. Those that extend to the head, through the jugular region,
appear large in the neck. From the extremity of each of these many
veins are distributed upon the head, some on the right side to the
left, others on the left side to the right, they all end near the ear.
And there is a second vein upon the neck on each side, somewhat less
than the other, to which the principal veins of the neck are united.
These pass inwards, through the neck, and from each of them veins pass
beneath the shoulder-blade and to the hands; and near the splenetic
and hepatic veins there appear others a little less, which they divide
when any disease attacks the skin; but the hepatic and splenetic veins
are divided for any disease in the neighbourhood of the stomach.

7. "Other veins pass from these, beneath the breasts; and there are
other small ones, which proceed from each of these through the spinal
marrow to the testicles, and others beneath the skin, through the
flesh, reach the kidneys; in men they terminate upon the testicles, in
women on the uterus. The first veins from the stomach are wider, and
afterwards become smaller, until they pass over from the right to the
left, and from the left to the right; these are called the spermatic
veins. The thickest blood is beneath the flesh, but that which is in
excess in these places becomes thin, and warm, and frothy." These are
the opinions of Syennesis and Diogenes.

8. Polybus[91] writes thus: "There are four pair of veins, one from
the back of the head through the neck, on the outside, near the spine
on either side, as far as the thighs and the legs, afterwards through
the legs to the ancles, on the outside, and to the feet. Wherefore,
in complaints of the back and thigh, they divide the veins upon the
poplitic region, or ancles, on the outside. Another pair of veins pass
from the head, by the ears, through the neck, these are called the
jugular veins; and others within, near the spine, lead by the loins to
the testicles and the thighs, and through the poplitic region on the
inside, and through the leg to the inner part of the ancle, and the
feet; wherefore, in complaints of the loins and testicles, they bleed
in the poplitic region and ancles.

[91] Polybus, a pupil of Hippocrates, a native of the island of Cos; he
lived in the fourth century B.C. Many treatises on medical subjects are
attributed to him.

9. "The third pair of veins, from the temple through the neck, and
beneath the scapula, reach the lungs; those from the right to the left,
under the breast, to the spleen and kidneys; and those from the left
to the right side, from the lungs, under the breast, and liver, and
kidney; and both end beneath the testicles. The fourth pair from the
forepart of the head and the eyes, under the neck and collar-bones;
from thence they extend through the humerus to the elbow, and through
the cubitus to the wrist and the fingers, and through the lower part
of the arm to the arm-pits, and the upper part of the lungs. The one
reaches as far as the spleen, the other to the liver; afterwards they
both pass over the abdomen to the pudendum."


CHAPTER III.

1. The opinions of other persons are nearly these; and there are other
physiologists, but they have not treated so accurately of the veins.
But all agree in placing their origin in the head and brain, in which
they are incorrect. But, as I have remarked before, it is difficult to
discern the course of the veins; indeed, it is impossible to understand
them unless a person will examine animals which, after emaciation, have
been killed by strangulation. The following is the nature of the veins:
There are two veins in the interior of the chest, near the spine; the
larger of these is placed forward, the smaller is behind; the larger is
inclined to the right side, the smaller to the left; and this by some
persons is called the aorta, from the sinewy portion which is seen in
dead animals.

2. These veins have their origin in the heart, for they pass completely
through the other intestines, and always preserve the character of
veins. The heart is, as it were, a part of them, and especially of the
more forward and larger one, for these veins are above and below, and
the heart is in the middle of them. The heart of all animals contains
cavities, but in the heart of very small animals the largest cavity is
scarcely perceptible, in moderately sized animals the second cavity
is scarcely visible, but in large animals they are all three distinct
enough. And when the apex of the heart is turned forwards, as I have
observed, the principal cavity is on the right side, and above it the
least is on the left side, and the middle-sized one is between them;
the two smaller are far less than the greater.

3. All these are perforated towards the lungs, but imperceptibly so
from the minuteness of the passage, except in one place. The great vein
is suspended from the upper portion of the principal cavity, and on the
right side; afterwards through the cavity a vein extends again, as if
the vein were a part of the cavity in which the blood stagnates. The
aorta has its origin from the middle cavity, but in a different manner
from the vein, for it communicates with the heart by a much narrower
passage, and the vein is continued through the heart. But the aorta
passes from the heart, and the great vein is membranous and like skin,
but the aorta is narrow and very sinewy, and as it is continued towards
the head and the lower parts of the body, it becomes narrow and quite
sinewy.

4. A portion of the great vein is first of all extended upwards
from the heart to the lung, and to the junction of the aorta, this
vein being undivided and large; from this place it divides into two
branches, the one towards the lung, and the other to the spine and the
lowest vertebra of the neck. The branch which goes to the lungs is
first divided into two branches, and afterwards it is continued upon
every tube and passage of the lungs, greater to the greater, and less
to the less, so as to leave no part in which there is not a passage and
a small vein. These last are invisible from their minute size, so that
the whole lung seems to be full of blood.

5. And the passages from the vein are above the tubes which extend from
the trachea. And the vein which is continued upon the vertebra of the
neck, and upon the spinal column, returns again to the spine, as Homer
writes in his poems: "He cut off the whole vein which passes up the
back and returns again to the neck;"[92] and from this vein branches
extend to each rib and to each vertebra; but that which is upon the
vertebra near the kidneys branches in two directions. These branches,
then, of the great vein are subdivided in this manner.

[92] Iliad. xiii. 546.

6. And above these, from that part which is continued from the heart,
the whole is again divided into two directions, for some reach to the
sides and the clavicles, and afterwards through the armpits to the
arms, in the human subject, but in quadrupeds to the fore-legs, to the
wings in birds, and to the pectoral fins in fishes. The commencements
of these veins, when they are first of all divided, are called jugular
veins; and having branched off in the neck from the great vein, they
are continued to the trachea of the lungs. And if these veins are held
on the outside, men fall down dead with insensibility, with closed
eyes, but without choking.

7. Extending in this manner, and receiving the trachea between them,
they reach the place where the jaws unite with the head; and again
from this point they are divided into four veins, one of which bends
backwards and descends through the neck and shoulder, and meets the
first division of the vein by the joint of the arm; the other portion
terminates in the hand and fingers; and another branch extends from
each part near the ear to the brain, where it is divided into many
small branches upon the membrane which surrounds the brain.

8. The brain never contains blood in any animal, nor does any vein,
small or great, terminate upon it; but some of the other branches that
extend from this vein surround the brain in a circle, and others, end
upon the organs of sense and the teeth in very small veins. In the same
manner, also, the branches of the smaller vein, which is called the
aorta, are divided: they are continued beside those of the great vein,
but the tubes are smaller and the branches less than those of the great
vein.


CHAPTER IV.

1. The veins, then, are thus distributed in the parts above the heart,
but the part of the great vein which is below the heart passes through
the middle of the diaphragm, and is united to the aorta and spinal
column by membranous flaccid passages. From this a short and wide vein
passes through the liver, from which many similar branches extend to
the liver, and disappear upon it. There are two branches of the vein,
one of which terminates upon the diaphragm, and what is called the
præcordia, the other returns through the arm-pit to the right arm,
and unites with the other veins near the interior part of the elbow.
For this reason physicians treat certain diseases of the liver by
venesection in this vein.

2. From the left of this there is a short and wide vein, which reaches
to the spleen, and the branches of this vein are lost upon this organ,
and another portion branching off in the same way from the left the
great vein passes up to the left arm, except that the last-mentioned
pass through the liver, but this one through the spleen. Other branches
also separate from the great vein, the one to the omentum, the other to
the pancreas; and from this many veins extend through the mesenterium,
and all end there in one great vein, which passes through the whole
intestine and the stomach, as far as the œsophagus; and many veins
branch off from them around these parts.

3. Both the aorta and the great vein continue as far as the kidney each
as a single duct; from this point they are more closely united to the
spinal column, and are each divided into two parts, like the letter
lambda (Λ), and the great vein is placed farther back than the aorta.
The aorta is more closely united to the spinal column, near the heart,
and the junction is formed by small sinewy veins.

4. The aorta leaves the heart as a large hollow passage, but as it
advances it becomes narrower and more sinewy. From the aorta, veins
extend also to the mesenterium, like those from the great vein, but
far inferior in size, for they are narrow and muscular. They terminate
in small hollow muscular veins. No branch of the aorta extends to the
liver and the spleen, but the branches of either vein extend to each
hip, and both touch upon the bone. Branches reach the kidney both from
the great vein and the aorta; they do not, however, enter the cavity,
but are taken up in the substance of the kidney.

5. Two other strong and continuous passages reach from the aorta to
the bladder, and others from the cavity of the kidney; but these do
not communicate with the great vein. From the centre of each kidney a
hollow sinewy vein passes through the other veins to the spinal column;
first of all they disappear upon each hip, and then appear again in
branches towards the hip; their extremities are distributed upon the
bladder and penis in the male, and upon the uterus in the female; no
branch of the great vein passes to the uterus, but many and thick ones
reach it from the aorta.

6. From the aorta and great vein branches are distributed to the nates;
at first they are large and hollow, afterwards they pass through the
legs, ending upon the feet and toes; and others again pass through the
nates and thighs, alternately from right to left, and they join with
other veins below the knees.

7. The nature and origin of the veins are evident from this
description. In all sanguineous animals, the nature and origin of the
principal veins are the same, but the multitude of smaller veins is
not alike in all, for neither are the parts of the same nature, nor do
all possess the same parts. Nor are the veins equally apparent in all
animals; but they are more manifest in those which have most blood,
and in the largest creatures; but in those animals which are small, and
have not much blood, either by nature or from excess in fat, they are
not so easily investigated, for some of the passages are confused, like
rivulets that are lost in beds of mud; and there are some animals which
have but few, and these fibres instead of veins. The great vein is very
conspicuous in all, even the smallest animals.


CHAPTER V.

1. The following is the nature of the sinews of animals. The origin of
these, also, is in the breast, for there is a sinew in the principal
cavity of the heart itself; and that which is called the aorta is a
sinewy vein, for its terminations are always sinewy, for they are not
hollow, and are extensible, like the sinews which end upon the bending
of the bones: for it is not the nature of sinews to be continuous from
one origin, like the veins, for the veins have the whole form of the
body as in outline sketches, so that in emaciated subjects the whole
mass appears full of veins, for the same place is occupied by veins in
lean persons that in fat ones is flesh.

2. The sinews are drawn round the joints and flexures of the bones;
but, if their nature were continuous, the continuation would be evident
in emaciated persons. The principal parts of the sinews are around
the part of the body appropriated to leaping, and this is called
the poples. Another double sinew is the tendon of the neck, and the
epitonus and the sinew of the shoulder, which aid in the support of the
body. The sinews around the joints have not received any name, for all
the bones where they are contiguous are bound together by the sinews.

3. And there are many sinews round all the bones; there are none in the
head; but the sutures of the skull are adapted to each other. It is the
nature of sinew to tear readily lengthwise, but across the fibre it is
indivisible, and it is very extensible. The sinews are surrounded by a
mucous, white, and gelatinous fluid, by which they are nourished, and
from which they seem to derive their origin. The vein does not alter
its form by combustion, but the sinew is entirely destroyed. Neither
does it unite after division.

4. Numbness does not take place in those parts of the body which
contain no sinews. The sinews are most abundant on the hands and feet,
and on the ribs and shoulder-blades, and round the neck and arms. All
sanguineous animals have sinews; but in those which have not jointed
limbs, and are without feet and hands, the sinews are small and
inconspicuous, so that in fishes they are most distinct near the fins.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The fibres are between the sinews and the veins; but some of them
are moistened with serum, and they extend from the sinews to the veins,
and from the veins to the sinews. There is also another kind of fibre,
which is produced in the blood of most, but not of all animals. When
this is extracted from the blood, it does not coagulate, but if it is
not taken out of the blood it coagulates. These fibres are present in
the blood of most animals, but not in that of the stag, prox,[93] and
bubalis,[94] and some others; so that their blood does not coagulate
like that of other animals: the blood of stags is very like that of
hares; for in both of these coagulation takes place; not firm, as in
other animals, but trembling, like that of milk, if no coagulating
substance is put into it. The blood of the bubalis coagulates more
thickly, only a little less so than that of sheep. This is the nature
of veins, sinews, and fibres.

[93] Cervis Capreolus, or C. dama.

[94] Antilope gnou.


CHAPTER VII.

1. The bones of animals depend upon one bone, and are connected with
each other, like the veins; and there is no such thing as a separate
bone. In all animals with bones the spinal column is their origin. The
spinal column is made up of vertebræ, and extends from the head to the
hips. All the vertebræ are perforated; the upper part of the head is a
bone joined to the last vertebra, and is called the skull, the saw-like
part is the suture.

2. This is not alike in all animals, for the cranium of some consists
of a single bone, as in the dog; in others it is compound, as in the
human subject. The female has one suture, in a circle; the male has
three, meeting at the top of the head, like a triangle; and human
skulls have been seen without sutures. The head is not composed of four
bones, but of six; two of these are placed above the ears, and are
small compared with the rest.

3. From the head the jaw-bones descend. All other animals move the
lower jaw, the river-crocodile alone moves the upper jaw. In the jaws
are the order of the teeth, which are bony, in some parts they are
perforated, in others they are not. These are the only bones too hard
to be engraved.

4. From the spinal-column, which is the point of union, originate the
clavicles and ribs; the breast also is placed upon the ribs, and some
of these are united, others are not, for no animal has a bone round
the stomach. There are also the scapulæ upon the shoulders, and these
are continued upon the arms, and those again to the hands; and in all
animals with fore legs the nature of the bone is the same.

5. At the extremity of the lower part of the spinal column, and next
to the hip, is the socket, and the bones of the lower extremity,
with those of the thigh and leg, which are called the colenes. The
ancles form a portion of these, and the part called the spur in all
creatures with ancles. Continuous with these are the bones of the feet.
Viviparous animals with blood and feet do not differ much in their
bones, but rather by analogy, in hardness, softness, and size. Again,
some of the bones contain marrow, whilst others, in the same animal,
have none.

6. Some animals do not appear to have any marrow at all in their
bones, as the lion, whose bones are very small and slight: or there
may be marrow in a few of its bones, as in those of the thigh and fore
leg; otherwise, in the lion, the bones are particularly solid, for
they are sufficiently hard to emit fire like stones on concussion.
The dolphin also has bones, but it has no spine, like fish. Some
sanguineous animals differ partially from these, as the class of birds.
In others, as fish, the bones are only analogous, for viviparous fish
have a cartilaginous spine, like those which are called selachea; the
oviparous fish have a spine, which is like the backbone of quadrupeds.

7. It is a peculiarity in fish that some species have small spines in
the flesh separated from each other. Serpents are like fish, for their
back-bone is spinous; among oviparous quadrupeds the greater animals
have a bony vertebral column; the lesser have a spinous one.

8. For all sanguineous animals have either a bony, or a spinous
column. The remainder of the bones exist in some animals, but not in
others, for if they have the limbs, they have the bones belonging to
them; for those that have not hind and fore legs have not hams, nor
are they present in those animals which possess limbs unlike those of
quadrupeds, for in these they vary in size and proportion. This is the
nature of the bones of animals.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. Cartilage is of the same nature as bone, but it differs in the
greater and less, and neither bone nor cartilage are reproduced if they
are cut off. In sanguineous and viviparous animals living on the land
the cartilage is imperforate, and does not contain marrow, like the
bones; but the flat selachea, which have a cartilaginous spine, have
a cartilage analogous to bone containing a liquid marrow. Viviparous
animals, with feet, have cartilage about their ears, nostrils, and
extremities of their bones.


CHAPTER IX.

1. There is another class of parts, which, though not the same as
these, are not very different, as nails, hoofs, claws, and horns, and
besides these, the beak of birds which alone possess this part. For
these are both flexible and fissile. But bone is neither flexible nor
fissile, but brittle; and the colour of horns, nails, claws, and hoofs
follow the colour of the skin and the hair: for in black animals the
horns are black, and so are the claws and hoofs in those with claws; in
white animals they are white. There are also intermediate colours, the
nails also are of the same nature.

2. But the teeth are like bones; wherefore, in black men, Ethiopians,
and such like, the teeth and the bones are white, but the nails are
black, like the rest of the skin. The horns of most animals are hollow
at their base, and surround a bony process on their heads; but at the
extremity the horn is solid and single. The stag's horns are solid
throughout, and divided; and these animals alone cast their horns; this
is done annually, if they are not cut off. Concerning those that are
cut off, we shall speak hereafter.

3. The horns are more nearly allied to skin than to bone, so that in
Phrygia and elsewhere there are oxen which have the power of moving
their horns, as they do their ears; and of those which have nails
(and all that have toes have nails, and those that have feet have
toes, except the elephant, which has its toes undivided, and scarcely
distinguished, and no nails at all)--and of those with nails, some have
straight nails, like men, others crooked, as the lion among beasts, and
the eagle amongst birds.


CHAPTER X.

1. This is the nature of hair and its analogues and skin. All
viviparous animals, with feet, have hair; oviparous animals, with feet,
have scaly plates; and those fish alone which produce friable ova are
covered with scales; for the conger and muræna among long fish have not
such ova, and the eel produces no ova. The hair differs in thickness,
thinness, and size, according to its situation, both in the parts of
the body which it occupies, and the nature of the skin, for upon thick
skins the hair is generally harsh and thick, the hair is both thicker
and longer in the hollow and moist parts of the body, if they are such
as to be covered with hair.

2. And the case is similar in those animals which are covered with
plates or scales. If animals covered with soft hair are placed in good
pastures their hair will become coarser; and, on the contrary, it
becomes finer and less in those that have coarse hair. Warm and cold
situations also make a difference, for the hair of natives of warm
climates is harsh, but it is soft in those of colder climates. Straight
hair is soft, crisped hair is harsh.

3. It is the nature of hair to split; and different kinds of hair are
dissimilar in excess and deficiency; some are so changed by harshness
as to bear slight resemblance to hair, and are more like spines, as in
the hedgehog, wherein they resemble nails. So again the nails in some
animals are not different from bones in point of hardness.

4. Man has the thinnest skin in proportion to his size. There is a
mucous, glutinous fluid in the skin of all animals, less in some,
more in others, as in the skins of oxen, from which glue is made; and
sometimes glue is made from fishes. When the skin alone is cut it is
insensible, especially that upon the head, from the absence of flesh
between that and the bone. Wherever the skin is without flesh it does
not unite again after being cut, as the thin part of the cheek, the
prepuce, and the eyelid. In all animals the skin is continuous, and
it is only wanting in places where there are natural passages for
exudation, and at the mouth and nails. All sanguineous animals have a
skin: all, however, have not hair, but those which are described above.

5. The colour of the hair changes in men as they grow old, and the hair
becomes grey. This takes place in other animals, but not so remarkably
as in the horse. The hair begins to grow white from the extremity. Most
white animals are white from their birth, wherefore it is plain that
whiteness does not arise from dryness, as some persons suppose, for no
animal is born dry. In the exanthematous disease, called whiteness,
all the hair becomes hoary; and some patients, who have suffered from
illness, after the hair has fallen off on recovery, have regained their
dark-coloured hair. Hair which is covered up becomes white more readily
than that which is exposed to the air; in man the temples are the first
to grow grey, and the fore part of the head before the hind part, and
last of all the hair on the pubes.

6. Some of the hair exists on the body at the period of birth, and some
appears afterwards. In man alone the hair on the head, eyelashes, and
eyebrows exist at birth. The hair on the pubes, in the armpits, and on
the chin appear successively after birth, so that the parts on which
the hair appears at birth, and those on which it grows afterwards are
the same in number. In old age the hair on the head especially is the
first to fail, and falls off. This is only in front, for no one ever
becomes bald on the back of the head. The smoothness on the crown of
the head is called baldness, that upon the eyebrows depilation; neither
of these takes place before the commencement of puberty.

7. Children, women, and eunuchs never become bald. If a person be
castrated before puberty, the hair which grows after birth never makes
its appearance; if after puberty these alone fall off, except the hair
on the pubes. Women have no hair upon the chin, excepting a few of
those in whom the catamenia have ceased, and the priestesses in Caria:
and this appears ominous of future events. Women also have other hair,
but not much. There are some persons, both male and female, who from
their birth are without the hair which grows after birth; but those
persons are barren who have not hair on the pubes.

8. The rest of the hair grows proportionally, either more or less. That
upon the head grows the most, then that on the chin, and thin hair most
of all. The eyebrows grow so thick upon some aged persons as to be cut
off, for they are placed upon the symphysis of the bone; and this being
separated in old persons, a more abundant moisture exudes. Those on the
eyelids do not grow, but they fall off, when persons come to puberty,
and especially in those of warm sexual desires; they become grey very
slowly. If the hair is plucked out during the period of growth, it
comes again, but not after it has done growing.

9. Every hair has at its root a glutinous moisture, which will adhere
to anything with which it comes in contact, soon after it is drawn out.
In spotted animals the spots exist both in the hair and upon the skin,
and upon the skin of the tongue. As for the beard, some persons have a
thick one, both beneath the chin and upon it; in others, these parts
are smooth, and the beard is on the cheeks. Those who have smooth chins
are least likely to become bald. The hair grows in some diseases, as
in phthisis especially, and in old age, and upon dead bodies, and the
hair becomes harder instead of softer. The same is the case with the
nails. In persons of strong passions, the hair that is born with them
decreases, while that which comes after birth increases.

10. Those who suffer from enlarged veins are less likely to become
bald; and if they have this disease after they are bald, the hair
sometimes grows again. The hair, when cut off, does not grow again from
the extremity, but increases by growth from the root. The scales of
fishes become harder and thicker, and in those that are growing thin
and old they become still harder. The hair and wool of old animals
becomes thicker, though the quantity decreases; and the hoofs and claws
enlarge as they grow old, and the beaks of birds. And the claws grow in
the same way as the nails.

11. Feathered animals, like birds, do not change their colour by age,
excepting the crane, for this bird is ash-coloured, and becomes black
by age. But from the change of season, when it becomes cold, some of
those having but one colour, black or grey, become white, as the crow,
sparrow, and swallow; but none of those which are white become black.
At different seasons of the year many birds change the colour of their
plumage, so as to render it difficult for those who are not acquainted
with them to recognise them.

12. And many animals change their colour with a change of water; for
in one place they are black, and in another white; and the same thing
takes place at the season of coition. There are many waters of such
a nature that if sheep drink of them before sexual intercourse, they
produce black lambs; as at that which is called the cold river in the
Thracian Chalcis (in Astyritis). And in Antandria there are two rivers,
one of which turns the sheep white, the other black; and the Scamander
appears to make the sheep yellow, wherefore some people think that
Homer called the Scamander the Xanthus.

13. Other animals have no hair internally, nor upon the bottom of their
feet, though it is on the upper part. The hare alone has hair on the
inside of its cheeks, and upon its feet, and the mysticetus[95] has no
teeth in its mouth, but hairs, like hog's bristles. The hair, if it is
cut off, increases below, but not above. Feathers do not grow either
above or below, but fall out. The wing of the bee, if it is plucked
off, does not grow again, nor that of any other creature which has an
undivided wing; nor does the sting of the bee grow after it is plucked
out, but the animal dies.

[95] Balæna Mysticetus.


CHAPTER XI.

1. There are membranes in all sanguineous animals. Membrane is
like a dense thin skin, but it differs in kind, for it is neither
divisible nor extensible. There is a membrane round every bone and
every intestine, both in the greater and smaller animals; they are
inconspicuous in small animals, owing to their thinness and small size.
The principal membranes are two, which surround the brain, one round
the bones of the head, and this is stronger and thicker than that round
the brain itself; and after these, the membrane which surrounds the
heart. A thin membrane does not unite after it has been cut asunder,
and the bones, when deprived of their membranes, become inflamed.

2. The omentum is a membrane. All sanguineous animals have an omentum;
in some it is fat, in others it contains no fat. In viviparous animals,
with cutting teeth in both jaws, it has its origin and is suspended
from the middle of the stomach, where it appears like a suture of this
organ. In those that have not teeth in both jaws, it is suspended in
the same way from the principal stomach.

3. The bladder also is membranous, but its character is different, for
it is extensible. All animals have not a bladder, but all viviparous
animals have this organ, and the tortoise alone of oviparous animals.
When the bladder is cut it does not re-unite, except at the very origin
of the urethra, or only very rarely, for it has happened sometimes.
No moisture passes into the bladder of dead animals; but in living
creatures there are dry compounds, from which are formed the stones
that are found in persons labouring under this disease; sometimes
they are of such a nature in the bladder as to differ in nothing from
shells. This, then, is the nature of veins, sinews, and skins, and of
muscle and membrane; and of hair, nails, claws, hoofs, horns, teeth and
beaks, and of cartilage, bone, and their analogues.


CHAPTER XII.

1. In all sanguineous animals, flesh, and that which is like flesh, is
between the skin and the bone, or what is analogous to bone: for the
same relation which a spine bears to a bone, is also borne by flesh to
that which is like flesh, in animals possessing bones and spines. The
flesh can be divided in every direction, and so is unlike sinews and
veins, which can only be divided in their length. The flesh disappears
in emaciated animals, giving place to veins and fibres. Those animals
which can obtain abundance of good food have fat instead of flesh.

2. Those that have much flesh have smaller veins and redder blood, and
their intestines and stomachs are small; but those which have large
veins and dark blood, and large intestines and great stomachs, have
also less flesh, for those that have fat flesh have small intestines.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. Adeps and fat differ from each other, for fat is always brittle, and
coagulates upon cooling, but adeps is liquid, and does not coagulate;
and broths made from animals with adeps do not thicken, as from the
horse and hog, but that made from animals with fat thickens, as from
the sheep and goat. These substances also differ in situation, for the
adeps is between the skin and the flesh; but the fat only exists upon
the extremity of the flesh. In adipose animals the omentum is adipose,
in fat animals it is fatty: for the animals with cutting teeth in both
jaws are adipose, those that have not cutting teeth in both jaws are
fat.

2. Of the viscera in some animals the liver is full of adeps, as in the
cartilaginous fishes, for oil is procured from these during the process
of decomposition, the cartilaginous fish are particularly free from
adeps on their flesh, but the adeps is separated on the stomach. The
fat also of fishes is adipose, and does not coagulate; and some animals
are furnished with adeps on the flesh, and others apart from the flesh;
and those creatures in which the adeps is not separated from the flesh
have less of this substance on the stomach and omentum, as the eel: for
these creatures have little fat on the omentum. In most animals the
adeps collects principally upon the abdomen, especially in those which
take little exercise.

3. The brain of adipose animals is unctuous, as in swine; that of fatty
animals is dry. Of all the viscera the kidneys are surrounded by the
greatest quantity of adeps in all animals; that on the right side is
always the least adipose; and let there be ever so much adeps, there is
always a space left between the kidneys. They are also the most fatty
of the viscera, and especially in sheep, for this animal sometimes
dies from the entire concealment of its kidneys in fat. This excessive
fat around the kidneys arises from good pasture, as in the Leontine
territory of Sicily; wherefore also in the evening they drive away the
sheep which have been feeding during the day, in order that they may
take less food.

4. The fat around the pupil of the eye is common to all animals; for
all have fat in this part, that possess it, and are not hard-eyed. Fat
animals, both male and female, are more inclined to be barren, and all
old animals become fat more readily than young ones, especially when
they increase in depth, having obtained their proper width and length.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. The following is the nature of the blood. This is most essential and
common to all sanguineous animals, and is not superadded, but exists
in all animals that are not in a perishing condition. All the blood is
in a vessel called the veins, but in no other part of the body, except
the heart. The blood of all animals has no sense of touch, nor has the
excrementitious matter in the stomach; neither have the brain, nor the
marrow, any sensation of touch; but wherever the flesh is divided, the
blood flows in the living subject, unless the flesh is perishing. It is
the nature of the blood to have a sweet juice, as long as it is healthy
and a red colour, and that is bad which either by nature or disease is
black. The best kind of blood is neither very thick nor thin, unless it
is vitiated either by nature or disease.

2. In living animals it is always warm and moist, but when taken out
of the animal the blood of all creatures coagulates, except that of
the stag and deer, and perhaps some others of the same nature. The
blood of all other creatures coagulates, unless the fibre is taken
out of it. Bullock's blood coagulates faster than that of any other
animals. Amongst sanguineous animals, those which are both internally
and externally viviparous, have the most blood, and after them the
oviparous sanguineous animals; those which are well disposed, either by
nature or by health, have not a great deal of blood, as in those that
have just drank; nor a very little, as in those which are very fat. Fat
animals have pure blood, though the quantity is small; as they become
more fat they lose a portion of their blood, for fat is free from
blood. Fat is not corruptible, but blood and the parts that contain
blood are very corruptible; of these the parts surrounding the bones
are most corruptible.

3. Man has the thinnest and purest blood, that of the ox and ass is the
thickest and blackest of all viviparous animals. The blood is thicker
and blacker in the lower than in the upper part of animals. The blood
palpitates in the veins alike in all animals; this alone of all the
fluids exists in every part of the body of living subjects, and as long
only as they are alive. The blood first of all exists in the heart of
all animals before it is distributed through the body. When deprived of
their blood, or if the greater part escapes, they faint away; but when
a very great deal is lost, they die. When the blood becomes very much
liquefied, illness ensues, for it becomes like serum, and flows through
in such a manner, that some have perspired blood; and when taken out
of the body, it does not coagulate into a mass, but into separate and
divided portions.

4. In sleeping animals, the blood in the extremities is diminished, so
that it does not flow freely when they are pricked. Blood is formed
from serum, and fat from blood. When the blood becomes diseased,
hæmorrhoids are produced, either in the nose or anus, and a disease
called ixia.[96] When the blood becomes corrupted in the body, pus is
formed, and from pus a scab. The blood in females differs from that of
males, for it is more thick and black in females of similar health and
age. In the whole of the body the quantity of blood is less in females,
but internally they are more full of blood. Of all females, women have
the most blood, and the catamenia are more abundant in them than in
other females.

[96] Varicose veins.

5. When this blood is diseased, it is called a flooding. Women have a
less share in other diseases; but a few are afflicted with ixia, and
with hæmorrhoids and bleeding from the nose; when any of these take
place, the catamenia decrease. The blood differs in proportion to the
age in quantity and appearance, for when very young, it is more like
serum, and very abundant; in the aged it is thick, black, and in less
quantity; in those in the prime of life it is between these. In aged
persons the blood coagulates quickly in the body, or on the surface;
but in young persons this does not take place. Serum is imperfect
blood, because it has not ripened, or because it has become more fluid.


CHAPTER XV.

1. Concerning marrow, for this is one of the fluids which exist in some
animals. All the natural fluids of the body are contained in vessels,
as the blood in the veins, and the marrow in the bones, and others in
membranes, skin, and cavities. The marrow is always full of blood in
young animals; but when they grow older, in the adipose it becomes
adipose, in fat animals fatty. There is not marrow in all the bones,
but only in those that are hollow, and not even in some of these,
for some of the bones of the lion have no marrow, others but little;
wherefore some persons say the lion has no marrow at all, as was before
observed. In the bones of swine there is very little marrow, in some
none at all.


CHAPTER XVI.

1. These fluids are nearly always co-existent with animal life; but
milk and the spermatic fluid are produced afterwards. Of these the
milk is always secreted in those animals in which it is present. The
spermatic fluid is not secreted in all, but in some as in fishes are
what are called melts. All animals having milk have it in the mammæ.
All animals that are both internally and externally viviparous have
mammæ, that is, all that have hair, as man, and the horse, the cetacea,
as the dolphin, seal, and whale, for these also have mammæ and milk.

2. Those animals that are only externally viviparous, and oviparous
animals, have neither mammæ nor milk, as fish, and birds. All milk has
a watery serum, which is called whey, and a substantial part called
curds; the thicker kinds of milk have the most curds. The milk of
animals without cutting teeth in both jaws, coagulates, wherefore
cheese is made from the milk of domestic animals. The milk of those
with cutting teeth in both jaws does not coagulate, but resembles their
adeps, and is thin and sweet; the milk of the camel is the thinnest of
all, next is that of the horse; in the third place that of the ass.
Cow's milk is thicker.

3. Under the influence of cold, milk does not coagulate, but becomes
fluid; by heat it is coagulated, and becomes thick. There is no milk
in any animal before it has conceived, or but rarely; but, as soon
as it has conceived the milk is produced; the first and last milk
are useless. Sometimes milk has come in animals not with young, from
partaking of particular kinds of food; and even in aged females it has
been produced so freely when sucked, as to afford nourishment for an
infant. And the shepherds round Æta, when the shegoats will not endure
the approach of the males, cut their udders violently against a thorn,
so as to cause pain; at first, when milked, they produce bloody, and
afterwards putrid milk, but at last their milk is as good as that of
those which have young ones.

4. The males, both of man and other animals, rarely produce milk;
nevertheless, it is found in some cases: for in Lemnos, a he-goat
has given from the two nipples, which are always found on the penis,
so much milk, that cakes of cheese were made from it. The same thing
happened to another he-goat, which was produced from this one; but such
things as these are considered ominous: for, on inquiry being made of
the god of Lemnos, he replied that there should be an additional supply
of cattle. A small quantity of milk has been forced from some men after
puberty; from others a great quantity has been produced by suction.

5. There is a fatness in milk which becomes oily when it is cooked.
In Sicily, and other countries, when there is an abundant supply of
goat's milk, they mix ewe's milk with it, and it coagulates readily,
not only because it contains abundance of curd, but also because it
is of a drier nature. Some animals have more milk than enough for the
support of their offspring, and this is useful for making cheese, and
for putting aside. The best is that of the sheep and goats, and next,
that of the cow. Mare's milk and ass's milk are combined with the
Phrygian cheese. There is more cheese in the milk of the cow than of
the goat: for the shepherds say, from an amphora of goat's milk they
can make nineteen cakes of cheese, each worth an obolus, and thirty
from cow's milk. Other creatures have only enough for their young, and
no superabundance useful for making cheese, as all those animals which
have more than two mammæ, for none of these have a superabundance of
milk, nor will their milk make cheese.

6. Milk is coagulated by the juice of figs, and by rennet; the juice
is placed upon wool, and the wool is washed in a little milk; this
coagulates upon mixture. The rennet is a kind of milk, which is found
in the body of sucking animals. This rennet is milk, containing cheese,
for the milk becomes cooked by the heat of the body. All ruminating
animals contain rennet, and the hare among those with cutting teeth in
both jaws. The older coagulum is the better, for such rennet is useful
in diarrhœa, and so is that of the hare. The rennet of the fawn is the
best.

7. The greater or less quantity of milk drawn from those animals which
have milk, differs in the size of the body, and the variety of the
food. In Phasis there are very small cows, each of which gives a great
deal of milk; and the large cows of Epirus give an amphora and half of
milk from each of their two mammæ; and the person who milks them stands
up, or only leans a little, because he cannot reach them sitting down.
The other animals of Epirus are large except the ass, but the largest
are the cows and the dogs. These large cattle require more pasture; but
the country has a great deal so excellent, that they can be changed to
fit places every hour. The oxen are the largest, and the sheep, called
Pyrrhic; they have received this name from king Pyrrhus.

8. Some kinds of food check the milk, as the medic grass, especially
in ruminating animals. The cytisus and orobus have a very different
effect; but the flower of the cytisus is unwholesome, and causes
inflammation; the orobus does not agree with pregnant cattle, for it
causes difficulty of parturition. On the whole, those animals which are
able to eat the most food, as they are better adapted for parturition,
will also give the most milk, if they have enough food. Some of the
flatulent kinds of food, when given to animals, increase the quantity
of milk, as beans given freely to the sheep, goat, ox, and chimœra,[97]
for they cause the udder to be distended; and it is a sign that there
will be plenty of milk when the udder is seen below before parturition.

[97] Some kind of domestic goat, but not known.

9. The milk lasts a long time in those that have it, if they remain
without sexual intercourse, and have proper food; and in sheep it
lasts longer than in any other animals, for the sheep may be milked
for eight months. Altogether the ruminating animals produce milk in
greater abundance, and more fitted for making cheese. Around Torona the
cows fail in their milk a few days before calving, but give milk all
the rest of the time. In women dark-coloured milk is better for the
children than that which is white; and black women are better nurses
than white women. The most nutritious milk is that which contains the
most cheese, but that which contains less cheese is better for infants.


CHAPTER XVII.

1. All sanguineous animals eject the spermatic fluid; the office it
performs in generation, and how it is performed, will be treated of in
another place. In proportion to his size man ejects more than other
animals. This fluid, in animals covered with hair, is glutinous, in
others it is not glutinous; in all it is white, so that Herodotus is
mistaken when he says that the Ethiopians have black semen.[98] The
semen comes out white and thick if it is healthy, but after ejection
it becomes thin and black; it does not thicken with cold, but becomes
thin and watery, both in colour and density. By heat it coagulates and
thickens, and when it has been ejected for any time into the uterus,
it comes out more thick, and sometimes dry and twisted together. That
which is fruitful sinks in water, but the barren mixes with it. All
that Ctesias said about the semen of the elephant is false.

[98] Herodotus, iii. c. 97, 101.




BOOK THE FOURTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. We have hitherto treated of sanguineous animals, the parts possessed
by all as well as those which are peculiar to each class, and of
their heterogeneous and homogeneous, their external and internal
parts. We are now about to treat of ex-sanguineous animals. There
are many classes of these, first of all the mollusca.[99] These are
ex-sanguineous animals, which have their fleshy parts external, and
their hard parts internal, like sanguineous animals, as the whole tribe
of cuttle-fish. Next the malacostraca, these are animals which have
their hard parts external, and their interior parts soft and fleshy;
their hard parts are rather liable to contusion than brittle, as the
class of carabi and cancri.

[99] The Cephalopoda.

2. Another class is that of the testacea. These are animals which have
their internal parts fleshy, and their external parts hard, brittle,
and fragile, but not liable to contusion. Snails and oysters are
instances of this class.

3. The fourth class is that of insects, which includes many dissimilar
forms. Insects are animals which, as their name signifies, are insected
either in their lower or upper part, or in both; they have neither
distinct flesh nor bone, but something between both, for their body is
equally hard internally and externally. There are apterous insects,
as the julus and scolopendra; and winged, as the bee, cockchafer, and
wasp; and in some kinds there are both winged and apterous insects;
ants, for example, are both winged and apterous, and so is the glowworm.

4. These are the parts of animals of the class mollusca (malacia);
first the feet, as they are called, next to these the head, continuous
with them; the third part is the abdomen, which contains the viscera.
Some persons, speaking incorrectly, call this the head. The fins are
placed in a circle round this abdomen. It happens in many of the
malacia that the head is placed between the feet and the abdomen.

5. All the polypi, except one kind, have eight feet, with a double row
of suckers. The sepia,[100] teuthis,[101] and teuthos[102] possess as a
characteristic part two long proboscidiform members, which have rough
suckers at their extremities, with which they seize their food and
bring it to their mouth; and when a storm arises they weather it out,
fastening these members upon a rock, like an anchor. They swim by means
of the fin-like members which are attached to the abdomen. There are
suckers upon all their feet.

[100] Sepia officinalis.

[101] Loligo vulgaris (_Owen_).

[102] Loligo media (_Owen_).

6. The polypus[103] uses its tentacula both as feet and hands, for it
brings its food to its mouth with the two that are above the mouth, and
it uses the last of its tentacula, which is the sharpest of all, in the
act of coition; this is the only one which is at all white, and it is
divided at the extremity, it is placed upon the back; and the smooth
part, in front of which are the acetabula, is called the back. In front
of the abdomen, and above the tentacula, they have a hollow tube,
by which they eject the sea-water which they have received into the
abdomen, if any enters through the mouth. This part varies in position,
and is sometimes on the right side, sometimes on the left, and by this
its ink is ejected.

[103] Sepia octopodia.

7. It swims sideways upon the part called the head, stretching out its
feet; as it swims it is able to see forwards, for the eyes are upwards,
and the mouth is placed behind. As long as it is alive the head is
hard, as if it were inflated; it touches and holds with its tentacula
bent downwards, a membrane is extended throughout, between the feet, if
it falls into the sand, it can no longer hold by it.

8. The polypus and the above-mentioned malacia differ from each other;
the abdomen of the polypus is small, and the feet are large; but of
the others, the abdomen is large, and the feet small, so that they
cannot walk upon them. They have also differences among each other; the
teuthis is the smallest, the sepia wider; the teuthos is much larger
than the teuthis, for it reaches the length of five cubits. Some sepiæ
are two cubits long, and the tentacula of the polypus are as long, and
even larger in size.

9. The class of the teuthos is rare, and differs in form from the
teuthis, for the extremity of the teuthos is wider; and, again, the fin
is placed round the whole abdomen, but it is wanting in the teuthis. It
is a marine animal, as well as the teuthis. After the feet, the head of
all these animals is placed in the middle of the feet, which are called
tentacula; one part of this is the mouth, in which are two teeth;
above these are two large eyes; between these is a small cartilage,
containing a small brain.

10. In the mouth is a small piece of flesh, for these animals have no
tongue, but use this instead of a tongue. After this, on the outside,
the abdomen is apparent. The flesh of this can be divided, not in a
straight line, but in a circle. All the malacia have a skin around
this part. After the mouth, they have a long and narrow œsophagus; and
continuous with this is a large round crop, like that of a bird; this
contains the stomach, like a net. Its form is spiral, like the helix of
a whelk; from this a thin intestine turns back, to the vicinity of the
mouth. The intestine is thicker than the stomach.

11. The malacia have no viscus, except that which is called the
mytis,[104] and the ink which is upon it. The most abundant and largest
of all is that of the sepia; all exclude this ink, when alarmed, but
especially the sepia; the mytis lies beneath the mouth; and through
this the œsophagus passes; and where the intestine turns back the
ink is beneath, and the same membrane surrounds both the ink and the
intestine. The same orifice serves for the emission of the ink and the
fœces.

[104] Köhler supposes the part called by Aristotle _mytis_ to have
been the glandular appendages on the vena cava and two visceral veins.
(_Owen in Todd's Cyclopedia of Anatomy, Art. Cephalopoda._)

12. There are some appearances of hair[105] in their bodies; the sepia,
teuthis, and teuthos, have a hard part upon the forward part of the
body; the one is called sepium (the bone of the cuttle-fish), the other
xiphus (the pen of the loligo). These two are different; for that of
the sepia is strong and wide, partaking of the nature of spine and
bone, and it contains a spongy, friable substance; but the pen of the
teuthis is thin, and cartilaginous. In their form also they correspond
with the differences of the animals themselves. The polypus has no
hard internal part, but a portion of cartilage round the head, which
becomes hard as they grow old.

[105] Probably the branchia.

13. The females also differ from the males, for the latter have a
passage beneath the œsophagus, extending from the brain to the lowest
part of the body. That part to which it reaches is like a teat. In
the female there are two such organs, which are placed above. In both
sexes, some small red bodies are placed under these. The polypus has
one capsule of eggs, which is uneven on the surface; it is large;
internally it is all of a white colour, and smooth. The multitude of
the ova is so great as to fill a vessel larger than the head of the
polypus.

14. The sepia has two capsules, and many eggs are in them, like
white hailstones. The position of each of these parts may be seen in
anatomical diagrams. In all these creatures the male differs from the
female, and especially in the sepia. The fore part of the abdomen of
the male is always darker than the back; and more rough than in the
female, and variegated with stripes, and the extremity of the body is
more acute.

15. There are many kinds of polypus; one, which is the largest of
all, is very common. Those near land are larger than those which are
caught out at sea. There are smaller kinds, which are variegated;
these are not articles of food; and two others, one of which is called
eledone,[106] differs in the length of its feet, and is the only one of
the malacia with a single row of suckers, for all the rest have two;
the other is called bolitæna,[107] and sometimes ozolis.

[106] Eledone moschata.--_Leach._ (_Owen._)

[107] Eledone cirrosa.--_Leach._ (_Owen._)

16. There are two other kinds which dwell in shells, which some persons
call nautilus[108] (and nauticus), and others call it the egg of the
polypus; its shell is like that of the hollow pecten, and not like
that which has its shells close together.[109] This animal generally
feeds near the land; when it is thrown upon the shore by the waves,
after its shell has fallen off, it cannot escape, and dies upon the
land. These animals are small in form, like the bolitæna; and there is
another,[110] which inhabits a shell like a snail. This animal never
leaves its shell, but remains in it, like the snail, and sometimes
stretches out its tentacula. Let thus much be said about the malacia.

[108] Argonauta argo. (_Owen._)

[109] This is probably the meaning of the passage. Two kinds of pectens
were distinguished; the one large, hollow, and of a dark colour, the
other broad and sweeter, but harsh.

[110] Nautilus Pompilius (_Owen._)


CHAPTER II.

1. Of the malocostraca, there is one genus, of carabi,[111] and
another, very like it, of astaci;[112] these differ from the carabi,
which have no claws, and in some other respects. There is a third
genus, of carides,[113] and a fourth, of carcini.[114] There are more
genera of carides, and of carcini; for among the carides are the
cyphæ,[115] the crangon,[116] and a small species, for these never grow
large.

[111] Palinurus, spiny lobster (Bell's crustacea).

[112] Lobster.

[113] Prawns.

[114] Crabs.

[115] Shrimp.

[116] Perhaps Prawn.

2. The family of carcini is more various, and not so easily enumerated;
the largest genus is that called maia,[117] the next to this the
pagurus,[118] and the Heracleot carcini; and, again, those that live
in rivers. The other genera are small, and have not received any name.
On the Phenician coast there are some that they call horsemen, because
they run so fast that it is difficult to catch them, and when opened,
they are empty, because they have no pasture. There is another small
genus like carcini, but in shape they resemble astaci.

[117] Perhaps Maia squinado.

[118] Cancer paguras, Great crab.

3. All these creatures, as I observed before, have their hard and
shelly coats on the outsides of their bodies in the place of skin, the
fleshy part is internal. Their under parts resemble plates, upon which
the females deposit their ova; the carabi have five feet on each side,
including the claws; the carcini, also, have in all ten feet, including
the claws, which are last. Of the carides, the cypha have five on each
side; those near the head are sharp, and five others on each side of
the stomach have flat extremities; they have no plates upon the under
part of their body; those on the upper part are like the carabi.

4. The crangon is different, for it has, first of all, four plates on
each side, and, afterwards, three slight ones, continuous with those
on each side, and the greater part of the remainder of its body is
apodal; all the feet are directed outwards to the side, like those of
insects; but the claws, in those that have them, all turned inwards.
The carabus also has a tail, and five fin-like appendages. The cypha,
among the carides, has a tail, with four fin-like appendages. The
crangon has fin-like processes on each side of the tail, and the middle
of them is spinous on both sides; but this part is wide in the crangon,
and sharp in the cypha. The carcini alone are without a tail; the body
of the carabi and carides is elongated, that of the carcini is rounded.

5. The male carabus is different from the female, for the female has
the first foot divided; in the male it is formed of a single claw, and
the fin-like process on the lower part is large in the female, and
interchanged with each other in the neck; in the male they are small
and not interchanged. In the male, also, the last feet are furnished
with large and sharp processes like spurs; in the female these are
small and smooth. They all have two large and rough processes, like
horns, before their eyes, and two, smaller and smooth, below.

6. The eyes of all these animals are hard, and capable of motion,
inwards, outwards, and to the side; the same is the nature of the
carcini, in which they are even more moveable. In colour the astacus
is all of a dull white, sprinkled with black; it has eight small feet,
as far as the large ones; after these the large feet are far greater
and wider at the extremity than in the carabus, and they are unequal
in size; for on the right side the broad part at the end is long and
smooth, on the left side the same part is thick and round; they are
both divided from the extremity like a jaw, with teeth above and below,
only that in those on the right the teeth are all small and sharp, and
they are sharp at the extremity of the left side; in the middle they
are like molar teeth; in the lower part are four close together, but in
the upper part three, but not close together.

7. In both claws the upper part is moved and pressed down upon the
lower; both are placed sideways in position, as if intended by nature
for seizure and pressure; above these large feet are two rough ones, a
little below the mouth; and still lower, the branchial organs around
the mouth, which are rough and numerous, and these are continually in
motion; it bends and approximates its two rough feet towards its mouth;
the feet near the mouth have smooth appendages.

8. It has two teeth like the carabus, above these the long horns,
much shorter and smoother than in the carabus; four others of the same
form as these, but still shorter and smoother; and above these are
placed its eyes, which are small and short, and not large like those
of the carabus. The part above the eyes is acute and rough, as it were
a forehead, and larger than in the carabus: on the whole, the head is
sharper and the thorax much wider than in the carabus, and its whole
body is more fleshy and soft: of its right feet, four are divided at
the extremity, and four not divided.

9. The part called the neck is externally divided into five portions,
the sixth and last division is wide and has five plates; in the inside
are four rough plates, upon which the females deposit their ova. On
the outside of each of these which have been mentioned, there is a
short and straight spine, and the whole body, with the part called the
thorax, is smooth, and not rough as in the carabus. On the outside of
the large feet there are great spines. The female does not in any way
differ from the male, for whether the male or female have larger claws,
they are never both of them equal.

10. All these animals take in sea-water through their mouths; the
carcini also exhale a small portion of that which they have taken in,
and the carabi do this through the branchiform appendages, for the
carabi have many branchiform appendages. All these animals have two
teeth: the carabi have two front teeth, and then a fleshy mouth instead
of a tongue, from this an œsophagus continued on to the stomach. And
the carabi have a small œsophagus before the stomach, and from this
a straight intestine is continued. In the caraboid animals and the
carides, this is continued to the tail in a straight passage, by which
they eject their excrements, and deposit their ova. In the carcini this
is in the middle of the folded part, for the place wherein they deposit
their ova is external in these also.

11. All the females also, besides the intestines, have a place for
their ova, and the part called mytis[119] or mecon, which is greater
or less, and the peculiar differences may be learned by studying the
individual cases. The carabi, as I have observed, have two large and
hollow teeth, in which there is a juice resembling the mytis, and,
between the teeth, a piece of flesh resembling a tongue; from the mouth
a short œsophagus extends to a membranous stomach; in the part of this
nearest the mouth are three teeth, two opposite and one below.

[119] Perhaps the liver.

12. And from the side of the stomach there is a simple intestine, which
is of equal thickness throughout, reaching to the anus. All these parts
belong to the carabi, carides, and carcini; and, besides these, the
carabi have a passage suspended from the breast and reaching to the
anus; in the female this performs the office of a uterus, in the male
it contains the spermatic fluid. This passage is in the cavity of the
flesh, so as to appear to be between portions of the flesh, for the
intestine is toward the curved part, but the passage towards the cavity
in the same way as in quadrupeds. In the male this part differs in
nothing from the female, for both are smooth and white, and contain an
ochreous fluid, and in both sexes it is appended to the breast.

13. The ova and spirals occupy the same position in the carides. The
male is distinguished from the female by having in the flesh upon the
breast two distinct white bodies, in colour and position like the
tentacula of the sepia; these appendages are spiriform, like the mecon
of the whelk; their origin is from the acetabula, which are placed
under the last feet. These contain a red sanguineous flesh, which is
smooth to the touch, and not like flesh. From the whelk-like appendage
there is another spiral fold, about as thick as a thread, below which
there are two sand-like bodies appended to the intestine, containing a
seminal fluid. These are found in the male, but the female has ova of
a red colour; these are joined to the abdomen, and on each side of the
intestine to the fleshy part of the body, enclosed in a thin membrane.
These are their internal and external parts.


CHAPTER III.

1. It happens that all the internal parts of sanguineous animals have
names, for all these have the internal viscera; but the same parts of
exsanguineous animals have no names, but both classes have in common
the stomach, œsophagus, and intestines. I have before spoken of the
carcini, and their legs and feet, and how many they have, and in what
direction, and that, for the most part, they have the right claw larger
and stronger than the left; I have also mentioned their eyes, and
that most of them are able to see sideways. The mass of their body is
undivided, and so is their head, and any other part.

2. In some the eyes are placed immediately below the upper part, and
generally far apart; in some they are placed in the middle, and near
together, as in the Heracleot carcini and the maia. The mouth is placed
below the eyes, and contains two teeth, as in the carabus, but they are
long and not round, and over these there are two coverings, between
which are the appendages, which the carabus also possesses.

3. They receive water through their mouth, opening the opercula, and
emit it again by the upper passage of the mouth, closing the opercula
by which it entered; these are immediately beneath the eyes, and when
they take in water they close the mouth with both opercula, and thus
eject again the sea-water. Next to the teeth is a very short œsophagus,
so that the mouth appears joined to the stomach, and from this proceeds
a divided stomach, from the middle of which is a single thin intestine;
this intestine ends externally beneath the folding of the extremity,
as I said before. Between the opercula there is something resembling
the appendages to the teeth of the carabi; within the abdomen is an
ochreous chyme, and some small elongated white bodies, and other red
ones scattered through it. The male differs from the female in length
and width, and in the abdominal covering, for this is longer in the
female, farther from the body, and more thick-set with appendages, as
in the female carabi. The parts of the malacostraca are of this nature.


CHAPTER IV.

1. The testacea, as cochleæ,[120] and cochli,[121] and all that are
called ostrea,[122] and the family of echini, are composed of flesh,
and this flesh is like that of the malacostraci, for it is internal;
but the shell is external, and they have no hard internal part. But
they have many differences amongst themselves, both in regard to their
external shells and their internal flesh, for some of them have no
flesh at all, as the echinus; in others it is entirely internal and
out of sight, except the head, as the land snails and those called
coccalia,[123] and in the sea the purpura[124] and the ceryx,[125] the
cochlus, and all the turbinated shells.

[120] Land snails.

[121] Marine.

[122] Bivalves.

[123] Some small land snail with a conical shell.

[124] Purpura.

[125] Whelk.

2. Of the rest some are bivalves, others univalves. I call those
bivalves which are enclosed in two shells; the univalves are enclosed
in one shell, and the fleshy part is uncovered, as the lepas.[126]
Some of the bivalves can open, as the pectens and mya, for all these
are joined on one side, and separated on the other, so as to shut and
open. There are other bivalves which are joined on both sides, as the
solen; others which are entirely enclosed in their shells, and have no
external naked flesh, as those which are called tethya.[127]

[126] Patella, limpet.

[127] Ascidians.

3. And there is a great difference amongst the shells themselves, for
some are smooth, as the solen, mya, and some conchæ, called by some
persons galaces;[128] other shells are rough, as the limnostrea,[129]
pinnæ, some kinds of conchæ, and the whelk; and of these some are
marked with ridges, as the pecten and a kind of concha, others are
without ridges, as the pinna and another species of concha. They also
differ in thickness and thinness, both in the whole shell and in
certain parts of the shell, as about the edges, for in some the edges
are thin, as the mya; others are thick-edged, as the limnostrea.

[128] Chama, L.

[129] Ostrea edulis.

4. Some of them are capable of motion, as the pecten, for some persons
say that the pectens can fly, for that they sometimes leap out of the
instrument by which they are taken. Others, as the pinna, cannot move
from the point of attachment; all the turbinated shells can move and
crawl; the lepas (patella) also feeds by going from place to place.
It is common to all those with hard shells to have them smooth in the
inside.

5. Both in univalves and bivalves the fleshy part is united to the
shell, so that it can only be separated by force; it is more easily
separated from the turbinated shells; it is a characteristic of all
these shells, that the base of the shell has the helix directed from
the head. All of them from their birth have an operculum; all the
turbinated testacea are right-handed, and move, not in the direction
of the helix, but the contrary way.

6. The external parts of these creatures are thus distinguished; the
nature of their internal structure is similar in all, especially in
the turbinated animals, for they differ in size and in the relations
of excess, the univalves and bivalves do not exhibit many differences.
Most of them have but few distinctive marks from each other, but they
differ more from the immovable creatures. This will be more evident
from the following considerations. In nature they are all alike, the
difference, as before said, is in excess; for in larger species the
parts are more conspicuous, and less so in those that are smaller. They
differ also in hardness and softness, and such like affections.

7. For all have on the outside of the shell, in the mouth, a hard piece
of flesh, some more, some less; from the middle of this are the head
and the two horns; these are large in larger species, in the little
ones they are very small. The head is protruded in the same manner in
all of them, and when the creature is alarmed it is again retracted;
some have a mouth and teeth, as the snail, which has small, sharp, and
smooth teeth.

8. They have also a proboscis, like that of the fly, and this organ is
like a tongue. In the ceryx and the purpura this organ is hard, like
that of the myops and œstrus, with which they pierce through the skins
of quadrupeds; but this is more powerful in strength, for they can
pierce through the shells of the baits. The stomach is joined quite
closely to the mouth; the stomach of the cochlus is like the crop of
a bird; below this there are two hard white substances like nipples,
which also exist in the sepia, but are much harder.

9. From the stomach a long, simple intestine reaches as far as the
spiral, which is on the extremity of the body. These are distinct, and
in the purpura and the ceryx are in the helix of the shell. The bowel
is continuous with the intestine. The intestine and bowels are joined
together, and are quite simple, to the anus. The origin of the bowel is
around the helix of the mecon,[130] and here it is wider. The mecon is,
as it were, a superfluous part in all testacea, afterwards another bend
causes it to return to the fleshy part; the end of the entrail, where
the fæces are emitted, is near the head, and is alike in all turbinated
shells, whether terrestrial or marine.

[130] The so-called liver (_Strack_). Papaver (_Scaliger_).

10. In the larger cochli a long white passage, contained in a membrane,
and in colour resembling the upper mastoid appendages, is joined from
the stomach to the œsophagus, and it is divided into segments like
the ovum of the carabus, except that it is white, while the other is
red. It has neither exit nor passage, but it is contained in a thin
membrane, which has a narrow cavity. From the intestine black and rough
bodies descend continuously, like those in the tortoise, but they are
less black.

11. Both these and white bodies occur in the marine cochli, but they
are less in the smaller kinds. The univalves and bivalves are in some
respects like these, and in others they are different, for they have a
head, horns, and mouth, and something like a tongue, though in smaller
species these are inconspicuous from their minute size, and they are
not discernible when the animals are dead or at rest. They all contain
the mecon, but not in the same position, nor of the same size, nor
equally conspicuous. In the lepas it is in the bottom of the shell, in
the bivalves near the hinge.

12. They all have hair-like appendages placed in a circle, and so have
the pectens, and that which is called the ovarium in those that have
it; where it is possessed, it is placed in a circle on the other side
of the circumference, like the white portion in the cochli, for this is
alike in all. All these parts, as I have said, are conspicuous in the
larger kinds, but in smaller not at all, or scarcely so, wherefore they
are most conspicuous in the larger pectens, and these have one valve
flat like an operculum.

13. The anus is placed in the side in some of these creatures, for this
is where the excrement passes out. The mecon, as I have said, is a
superfluous part enclosed in a thin membrane in all of them; that which
is called the ovarium has no passage in any of them, but it swells out
in the flesh. This is not placed upon the intestine, for the ovarium
is on the right side and the intestine on the left; the anus is the
same as in others; but in the wild patella, as some persons call it, or
the sea-ear (haliotis), as it is named by others, the excrement passes
out below the shell, for the shell is perforated. The stomach also is
distinct behind the mouth, and so is the ovarium in this animal. The
position of all these parts may be seen in dissections.

14. The creature called carcinium[131] resembles both the malacostraca
and the testacea, for this in its nature is similar to the animals that
are like carabi, and it is born naked (not covered with a shell). But
because it makes its way into a shell, and lives in it, it resembles
the testacea, and for these reasons it partakes of the character of
both classes. Its shape, to speak plainly, is that of a spider, except
that the lower part of the head and thorax is larger.

[131] Hermit crab.

15. It has two thin red horns, and two large eyes below these, not
within nor turned on one side, like those of the crab, but straight
forwards. Below these is the mouth, and round it many hair-like
appendages; next to these, two divided feet with which it seizes its
prey, and two besides these on each side, and a third pair smaller.
Below the thorax the whole creature is soft, and when laid open is
yellow within.

16. From the mouth is a passage as far as the stomach; but the anus is
indistinct; the feet and the thorax are hard, but less so than those
of the cancri; it is not united with the shell like the purpura and
ceryx, but is easily liberated from it. The individuals which inhabit
the shells of the strombus are longer than those in the shells of the
nerita.

17. The kind which inhabits the nerita is different, though very like
in other respects, for the right divided foot is small, and the left
one large, and it walks more upon this than the other; and a similar
animal is found in the conchæ, though they are united to their shells
very firmly; this animal is called cyllarus.[132] The nerita has a
smooth, large, round shell, in form resembling that of the ceryx, but
the mecon is not black, but red; it is strongly united in the middle.

[132] Cancer Diogenes.

18. In fine weather they seek their food at liberty, and if a storm
arises, the carcinia hide themselves under a stone, and the neritæ
attach themselves to it like the patella, the hæmorrhois, and all that
class, for they become attached to the rock, where they close their
operculum, for this resembles a lid; for that part which is in both
sides in the bivalves is joined to one side in the turbinated shells:
the interior is fleshy, and in this the mouth is placed.

19. The nature of the hæmorrhois, the purpura, and all such animals is
the same. But those which have the left foot greater are not found in
the shells of the strombus, but in the neritæ. There are some cochli
which contain an animal like the small astacus, which is found in
rivers; but they differ from them in having the inner part of the shell
soft. Their form may be seen by examining dissections.


CHAPTER V.

1. The echini contain no flesh, but this part is peculiar, for they are
all of them void of flesh, and are filled with a black substance. There
are many kinds of echinus, one of which is eatable; in this one the ova
are large and eatable, both in the greater and the less.

2. And there are two other kinds, the spatangus and that called
bryttus; these are inhabitants of the sea, and rare. Those which are
called echinometræ[133] are the largest of all. Besides this, there
is another small species, which has long and sharp spines; this is
procured from the sea, in many fathoms water, and some persons use it
for stranguary.

[133] Echinus esculentus.

3. Around Torona there are white marine echini, which have shells,
and prickles, and ova, and are longer than others; but the prickle is
neither large nor strong, but soft, and the black parts from the mouth
are more in number, and united to the outward passage, but distinct
among themselves, and by these the animal is as it were divided. The
eatable kinds are particularly and especially active, and it is a sign
of them; for they have always something adhering to their spines.

4. They all contain ova, but in some they are very small, and not
eatable: that which is called the head and mouth in the echinus is
downwards, and the anus placed upwards. The same thing occurs in the
turbinated shells, and the patella; for their food is placed below
them, so that the mouth is towards the food, and the anus at or on the
upper part of the shell.

5. The echinus has five hollow internal teeth, in the midst of these a
portion of flesh like a tongue; next to this is the œsophagus; then the
stomach, in five divisions, full of fæculent matter: all its cavities
unite in one, near the anus, where the shell is perforated. Beneath the
stomach, in another membrane, are the ova, the same number in all,
they are five in number, and uneven.

6. The black substance is joined above to the origin of the teeth, this
black substance is bitter and not eatable; in many animals there is
either this substance or its analogue, for it is found in tortoises,
toads, frogs, turbinated shells, and in the malacia; these parts differ
in colour, but are entirely or nearly uneatable. The body of the
echinus is undivided from beginning to end, but the shell is not so
when seen through, for it is like a lantern, with no skin around it.
The echinus uses its spines as feet, for it moves along by leaning upon
them and moving them.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The creatures called tethya[134] have a most distinct character,
for in these alone is the whole body concealed in a shell. Their shell
is intermediate between skin and shell, so that it can be cut like
hard leather: this shell-like substance is attached to rocks; in it
there are two perforations, quite distant from each other, and not
easily seen, by which it excludes and receives water, for it has no
visible excrement as other testacea, neither like the echinus, nor the
substance called mecon.

[134] Ascidian mollusks.

2. When laid open, there is first of all a sinewy membrane lining the
shell-like substance, within this the fleshy substance of the tethyon.
Unlike any other creature, its flesh, however, is alike throughout, and
it is united in two places to the membrane and the skin from the side,
and at its points of union it is narrower on each side; by these places
it reaches to the external perforations which pass through the shell;
there it both parts with and receives food and moisture, as if one were
the mouth, the other the anus, the one is thick, the other thinner.

3. Internally there is a cavity at each end, and a passage passes
through it; there is a fluid in both the cavities. Besides this, it
has no sensitive or organic member, nor is there any excrementitious
matter, as I said before. The colour of the tethyon is partly ochreous,
partly red.

4. The class acalephe[135] is peculiar; it adheres to rocks like some
of the testacea, but at times it is washed off. It is not covered with
a shell, but its whole body is fleshy; it is sensitive, and seizes upon
the hand that touches it, and it holds fast, like the polypus does
with its tentacula, so as to make the flesh swell up. It has a central
mouth, and lives upon the rock, as well as upon shell-fish, and if any
small fish falls in its way, it lays hold of it as with a hand, and if
any eatable thing falls in its way it devours it.

[135] Actiniæ.

5. One species is free, and feeds upon anything it meets with, even
pectens and echini; it appears to have no visible excrement, and in
this respect it resembles plants. There are two kinds of acalephe, some
small and more eatable, others large and hard, such as are found near
Chalcis. During winter their flesh is compact, wherefore in this season
they are caught and eaten; in summer time they perish, for they become
soft; if they are touched they soon melt down, and cannot by any means
be taken away. When suffering from heat, they prefer getting under
stones. I have now treated of malacia, malacostraca, testacea, and of
their external and internal parts.


CHAPTER VII.

1. Insects must now be treated of in the same manner. This is a class
which contains many forms, and no common name has been given to unite
those that are naturally related, as the bee, anthrene,[136] and wasp,
and such like; again, those which have their wings enclosed in a case,
as the melolontha,[137] carabus,[138] cantharis, and such like. The
common parts of all insects are three--the head, the abdomen, and the
third, which is between these, such as in other animals is the breast
and back. In many insects this is one, but in the long insects with
many legs, the middle parts are equal to the number of segments.

[136] Wild bee.

[137] Chafer.

[138] Beetle.

2. All insects survive being divided, except those which are naturally
cold, or soon become so from their small size, so that wasps live
after they are cut asunder; either the head or the abdomen will live
if united to the thorax, but the head will not live alone. Those which
are long, and have many feet, will survive division for a considerable
time; both the extremities are capable of motion, for they walk both
upon the part cut off and upon the tail, as that which is called
scolopendra. All of them have eyes, but no other manifest organs of
sense, except that some have a tongue. All the testacea have this
organ, which serves the double purpose of tasting and drawing food into
the mouth.

3. In some of them this organ is soft; in others very strong, as in the
purpura; in the myops and œstrus this member is strong, and in a great
many more; for this member is used as a weapon by all those that have
no caudal sting.

4. Those with this weapon have no small external teeth, for flies
draw blood by touching with this organ, and gnats sting with it. Some
insects also have stings, which are either internal, as in bees and
wasps, or external, as in the scorpion. This last is the only insect
that has a long tail; it has claws, and so has the little scorpion-like
creature[139] found in books. The winged insects, in addition to other
parts, have wings. Some have two wings, as the flies; others four, as
the bees; none of the diptera have a caudal sting. Some of the winged
insects have elytra on their wings, as the melolontha; and others no
elytra, as the bee. Insects do not direct their flight with their tail,
and their wings have neither shaft nor division.

[139] Phalangium Cancroides. _Linn. Schneider._

5. Some have a horn before their eyes, as the psychæ[140] and carabi.
Of the jumping insects, some have their hind-legs larger; others have
the organs of jumping bent backwards, like the legs of quadrupeds. In
all, the upper part is different from the lower, like other animals.

[140] Butterfly.

6. The flesh of their bodies is neither testaceous nor like the
internal parts of testacea, but between the two. Wherefore, also, they
have neither spine nor bone, as the sepia; nor are they surrounded
with a shell. For the body is its own protection by its hardness, and
requires no other support; and they have a very thin skin. This is the
nature of their external parts.

7. Internally, immediately after the mouth, there is an intestine
which in most insects passes straight and simply to the anus, in a few
it is convoluted; these have no bones nor fat, neither has any other
exsanguineous animal. Some have a stomach, and from this the remainder
of the intestine is either simple or convoluted, as in the acris.[141]
The tettix (grasshopper) alone of this, or any other class of living
creatures, has no mouth; but, like those with a caudal sting, it has
the appearance of a tongue, long, continuous, and undivided, and with
this it feeds upon the dew alone. There is no excrement in the stomach.
There are many kinds of these creatures, they differ in being greater
or less; those called achetae are divided beneath the diaphragm, and
have a conspicuous membrane, which the tettigonia has not.

[141] Locust.

8. There are many other creatures in the sea which it is not possible
to arrange in any class from their scarcity. For some experienced
fishermen say they have seen in the sea creatures like small beams,
black and round, and of the same thickness throughout; others like
shields, of a red colour, with many fins; others[142] like the human
penis in appearance and size, but instead of testicles they had two
fins, and that such have been taken on the extremity of grappling
irons. This is the nature of the internal and external parts of all
animals of every kind, both those which are peculiar to certain
species, and those which are common to all.

[142] Perhaps Pennatula.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. We must now treat of the Senses: for they are not alike in all,
but some have all the senses, and some fewer. They are mostly five in
number; seeing, hearing, smelling, taste, touch, and besides these
there are none peculiar to any creatures. Man, then, and all viviparous
animals with feet, besides all sanguineous and viviparous animals, have
all these, unless they are undeveloped in any particular kind, as in
the mole.

2. For this creature has no sight, it has no apparent eyes, but when
the thick skin which surrounds the head is taken away, in the place
where the eyes ought to be on the outside, are the undeveloped internal
eyes, which have all the parts of true eyes, for they have both the
iris of the eye, and within the iris the part called the pupil, and the
white; but all these are less than in true eyes. On the outside there
is no appearance of these parts, from the thickness of the skin, as if
the nature of the eye had been destroyed at birth; for there are two
sinewy and strong passages proceeding from the brain, where it unites
with the spinal cord, reaching from the socket of the eye, and ending
upon the upper sharp teeth.

3. All other animals are endued with the perception of colours, sounds,
smells, and taste. All animals have the fifth sense, which is called
touch. In some animals the organs of sense are very distinct, and
especially the eyes, for they have a definite place, and so has the
hearing. For some animals have ears, and others open perforations:
so also of the sense of smelling, some animals have nostrils, others
passages, as the whole class of birds. In the same way the tongue is
the organ of taste.

4. In aquatic animals and those called fish, the tongue is still
the organ of taste, though it is indistinct, for it is bony, and
not capable of free motion. In some fish the roof of the mouth is
fleshy, as in some cyprini among river fish, so that, without careful
examination, it appears like a tongue. That they have the sense of
taste is quite clear, for many of them delight in peculiar food, and
they will more readily seize upon a bait formed of the amia and other
fat fishes, as if they delighted in the taste and eating of such baits.

5. They have no evident organ of hearing and smelling, for the passages
which exist about the region of the nostrils in some fish do not appear
to pass to the brain, but some of them are blind, and others lead to
the gills; it is evident, however, that they both hear and smell, for
they escape from loud noises, such as the oars of the triremes, so as
to be easily captured in their hiding-places.

6. For if the external noise is not loud, yet to all aquatic animals
that are capable of hearing, it appears harsh and very loud; and this
takes place in hunting dolphins, for when they have enclosed them with
their canoes, they make a noise from them in the sea, and the dolphins,
crowded together, are obliged to leap upon the land, and, being stunned
with the noise, are easily captured, although even dolphins have no
external organs of hearing.

7. And again in fishing, the fishermen are careful to avoid making a
noise with their oars or net when they perceive many fish collected in
one place; they make a signal, and let down their nets in such a place
that no sound of the oar or the motion of the waters should reach the
place where the fish are collected, and the sailors are commanded to
row in the greatest silence until they have enclosed them.

8. Sometimes, when they wish to drive them together, they proceed as in
dolphin catching, for they make a noise with stones that they may be
alarmed and collected together, and thus they are enclosed in a net.
Before their inclosure, as it was said, they prevent a noise, but as
soon as they have enclosed them, they direct the sailors to shout and
make a noise, for they fall down with fear when they hear the noise and
tumult.

9. And when the fishers observe large shoals at a distance, collected
on the surface in calm, fine weather, and wish to know their size,
and of what kind they are, if they can approach them in silence, they
avoid their notice, and catch them while they are on the surface. If
any noise is made before they reach them, they may be seen in flight.
In the rivers, also, there are little fish under the stones, which
some persons call cotti:[143] from their dwelling beneath rocks, they
catch them by striking the rocks with stones, and the fishes fall
down frightened when they hear the noise, being stunned by it. It is
evident, from these considerations, that fishes have the sense of
hearing.

[143] Perhaps Cottus gobio L., miller's thumb. Salmo Fario (_Strack_).

10. There are persons who say that fish have more acute ears than other
animals, and that, from dwelling near the sea, they have often remarked
it. Those fish which have the most acute ears are the cestreus[144]
(chremps),[145] labrax,[146] salpe,[147] chromis,[148] and all such
fishes; in others the sense of hearing less acute, because they live in
the deeper parts of the ocean.

[144] Mullet.

[145] Unknown.

[146] Perca Labrax.

[147] Scomber.

[148] Unknown.

11. Their nature of smelling is the same, for the greater number of
fishes will not take a bait that is not quite fresh; others are less
particular. All fish will not take the same bait, but only particular
baits, which they distinguish by the smell; for some are taken with
stinking baits, as the salpe with dung. Many fish also live in the
holes of rocks, and when the fishermen want to entice them out, they
anoint the mouths of these holes with salted scents, to which they
readily come.

12. The eel also is enticed out in this way, for they place a pitcher
of salt food, covering the mouth of the pitcher with another vessel
pierced with holes, and the eels are quickly drawn forth by the smell
of the bait. Baits made of the roasted flesh of the cuttle fish, on
account of its strong smell, attract fish very readily. They say they
put the roasted flesh of the polypus upon their hooks for nothing but
its strong smell.

13. And the fish called rhyades,[149] when the washings of fish or
of fœtid drains are emptied into the water, make their escape as if
smelling the fœtid odour. They say that fish soon smell the blood of
their own kind; this is plain from their hastening from any place where
the blood of fishes may be. On the whole, if any one use a putrid bait,
the fish will not come near it; but if a fresh strong-smelling bait is
used, they will come to it from a great distance.

[149] A fish living in shoals.

14. This is especially observable in what was said of dolphins, for
these creatures have not external organs of hearing, but are captured
by being stunned with a noise, as was before observed; neither have
they any external organs of smell, yet their scent is acute. Therefore,
it is evident that all creatures have these senses. Other kinds of
animals are divided into four classes; and these contain the multitude
of remaining animals, namely, the malacia, malacostraca, testacea, and
insects.

15. Of these the malacia, the malacostraca, and insects have all the
senses, for they can see, smell, and taste. Insects, whether they have
wings or are apterus, can smell from a great distance, as the bee and
the cnips[150] scent honey, for they perceive it from a long distance,
as if they discovered it by the scent. Many of them perish by the
fumes of sulphur: ants leave their hills when origanum and sulphur are
sprinkled upon them. Almost all of them escape from the fumes of burnt
stags' horns, but most of all do they avoid the smell of burnt styrax.

[150] Perhaps some species of ant.

16. The sepia, also, the polypus, and the carabus are caught with
baits; the polypus holds the bait so fast that it holds on even when
cut: if a person hold conyza to them, they let go as soon as they smell
it. So, also, of the sense of taste, for they follow different kinds
of food, and do not all prefer the same food, as the bee approaches
nothing that is putrid, only sweet things; the gnat not what is sweet,
but what is acid.

17. As I before observed, the sense of touch belongs to all animals.
The testacea have the senses of smelling and tasting. This is plain
from the baits used, as those for the purpuræ; for this creature is
caught with putrid substances, and will be attracted from a great
distance to such baits, as if by the sense of smell. It is evident from
what follows that they possess the sense of taste; for whatever they
select by smell, they all love to taste.

18. And all animals with mouths receive pain or pleasure from the
contact of food. But, concerning the senses of sight and hearing, it is
not possible to say anything certain, or very distinct; the solens, if
a person touch them, appear to retract themselves, and try to escape
when they see an instrument approaching them, for a small portion
of them is beyond the shell, the remainder as it were in a retreat;
the pectens, also, if a finger is brought near them, open and shut
themselves as if they could see.

19. Those who seek for neritæ do not approach them with the wind, when
they seek them for baits, nor do they speak, but come silently, as if
the creatures could both smell and hear; they say that if they speak,
they get away. Of all testacea, the echinus appears to have the best
sense of smell amongst those that can move, and the tethya and balanus
in those that are fixed. This is the nature of the organs of sense in
all animals.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The following is the nature of the voice of animals, for there is
a distinction between voice and sound. Speech, again, is different
from these. Voice is due to no other part except the pharynx, the
creatures, therefore, without lungs are also without voice. Speech is
the direction of the voice by the tongue; the vowels are uttered by
the voice and the larynx, the mutes by the tongue and the lips; speech
is made up of these: wherefore, no animals can speak that have not a
tongue, nor if their tongue is confined.

2. The power of uttering a sound is connected with other parts also;
insects have neither voice nor speech, but make a sound with the air
within them, not with that which is external, for some of them breathe
not, some of them buzz, as the bee with its wings, and others are said
to sing, as the grasshopper. All these make a noise with the membrane
which is beneath the division of their body in those which have a
division, as some families of grasshoppers by the friction of the air.
These insects, bees, and all other insects raise and depress their
wings in flight, for the sound is the friction of the air within them.
Locusts produce a sound by rubbing themselves with their legs, which
are adapted for leaping. None of the malacia utter any sound or natural
voice, nor do the malacostraca.

3. Fish also are mute, for they have neither lungs, trachea, nor
pharynx. Some of them utter a sound and a squeak; these are said to
have a voice, as the lyra[151] and chromi,[152] for these utter, as
it were, a grunt; so does the capros, a fish of the Achelous, the
chalceus[153] and coccyx,[154] for the one utters a sound like hissing,
the other a noise like that of the cuckoo, from whence also its name
is derived. Some of these utter their apparent voice by the friction
of their gills, for these places are spinous, in others the sound is
internal, near the stomach. For each of them has an organ of breathing,
which causes a sound when it is pressed and moved about.

[151] Trigla Lyra.

[152] Cottus cataphractus.

[153] Zeus faber.

[154] Trigla hirundo.

4. Some of the selachea also appear to whistle, but they cannot be
correctly said to utter a voice, only to make a sound. The pectens
also make a whizzing noise when they are borne upon the surface of the
water, or flying, as it is called; and so do the sea-swallows,[155]
for they also fly through the air in the same way, not touching the
sea, for they have wide and long fins. As the sound made by birds
flying through the air is not a voice, so neither can either of these
be properly so called. The dolphin also utters a whistle and lows when
it comes out of the water into the air, in a different way from the
animals above-mentioned--for this is a true voice, for it has lungs and
a trachea, but its tongue is not free, nor has it any lips so as to
make an articulate sound.

[155] Flying fish.

5. The oviparous quadrupeds, with a tongue and lungs, utter a sound,
though it is a weak one. Some of them hiss like serpents; others have
a small weak voice, others, as the tortoise, utter a small hiss. The
tongue of the frog is peculiar, for the fore-part of it is fixed, like
that of a fish; but the part near the pharynx is free and folded up.
With this it utters its peculiar sound. The male frogs make a croaking
in the water when they invite the females to coition.

6. All animals utter a voice to invite the society and proximity of
their kind, as the hog, the goat, and the sheep. The frog croaks by
making its lower jaw of equal length, and stretching the upper one
above the water. Their eyes appear like lights, their cheeks being
swelled out with the vehemence of their croaking; for their copulation
is generally performed in the night. The class of birds utter a voice:
those which have a moderately wide tongue have the best voice; those
also in which the tongue is thin. In some kinds both male and female
have the same voice; in others it is different: the smaller kinds have
more variety in their voice, and make more use of it, than the larger
tribes.

7. All birds become more noisy at the season of coition. Some utter a
cry when they are fighting, as the quail; others when they are going to
fight, as the partridge; or when they have obtained a victory, as the
cock. In some kinds both male and female sing, as the nightingale; but
the female nightingale does not sing while she is sitting or feeding
her young: in some the males alone, as the quail and the cock; the
female has no voice. Viviparous quadrupeds utter different voices; none
can speak--for this is the characteristic of man, for all that have
a language have a voice, but not all that have a voice have also a
language.

8. All that are born dumb, and all children, utter sounds, but have no
language; for, as children are not complete in their other parts, so
their tongue is not perfect at first; it becomes more free afterwards,
so that they stammer and lisp. Both voices and language differ in
different places.

9. The voice is most conspicuous in its acuteness or depth, but the
form does not differ in the same species of animals; the mode of
articulation differs, and this might be called speech, for it differs
in different animals, and in the same genera in different places, as
among partridges, for in some places they cackle, in others whistle.
Small birds do not utter the same voice as their parents, if they are
brought up away from them, and have only heard other singing birds. For
the nightingale has been observed instructing her young, so that the
voice and speech are not naturally alike, but are capable of formation.
And men also have all the same voice, however much they may differ in
language. The elephant utters a voice by breathing through its mouth,
making no use of its nose, as when a man breathes forth a sigh; but
with its nose it makes a noise like the hoarse sound of a trumpet.


CHAPTER X.

1. Concerning the sleep and wakefulness of animals. It is quite
manifest that all viviparous animals with feet both sleep and are
awake; for all that have eyelids sleep with the eyes closed; and not
only men appear to dream, but horses, oxen, sheep, goats, dogs, and all
viviparous quadrupeds. Dogs show this by barking in their sleep. It is
not clear whether oviparous animals dream, but it is quite plain that
they sleep.

2. And so it is in aquatic animals, as fish, the malacia, the
malacostraca, the carabi, and such like creatures. The sleep of all
these animals is short: it is plain that they do sleep, though we can
form no conclusion from their eyes, for they have no eyelids, but from
their not being alarmed; for if fish are not tormented with lice, and
what are called psylli, they may be captured without alarming them, so
that they can be even taken with the hand. And if fish remain at rest
during the night a great multitude of these creatures fall upon and
devour them.

3. They are found in such numbers at the bottom of the sea as to devour
any bait made of fish that remains any length of time upon the ground;
fishermen frequently draw them out hanging like globes around the
bait. The following considerations will serve still more to confirm
our suppositions that fishes sleep; for it is often possible to fall
upon the fish so stealthily as to take by the hand, or even strike them
during this time; they are quite quiet, and exhibit no signs of motion
except with their tails, which they move gently. It is evident, also,
that they sleep, from their starting if anything moves while they are
asleep, for they start as if they were waked out of sleep.

4. They are also taken by torchlight while asleep; those who are
seeking for thynni surround them while asleep; it is evident that
they can be captured from their stillness, and the half-open white
(of their eyes). They sleep more by night than by day, so that they
do not move when they are struck; they generally sleep holding by the
ground, or the sand, or a stone, at the bottom, concealing themselves
beneath a rock, or a portion of the shore. The flat fishes sleep in the
sand; they are recognized by their form in the sand, and are taken by
striking them with a spear with three points. The labrax, chrysophrys,
cestreus, and such-like fish are often taken with the same kind of
weapon while asleep in the day time, but if not taken then, none of
them can be captured with such a spear.

5. The selache sleep so soundly that they may be taken with the hand;
the dolphin, whale, and all that have a blow-hole, sleep with this
organ above the surface of the sea, so that they can breathe, while
gently moving their fins, and some persons have even heard the dolphin
snore. The malacia sleep in the same manner as fish, and so do the
malacostraca. It is evident from the following considerations that
insects sleep; for they evidently remain at rest without motion; this
is particularly plain in bees, for they remain quiet, and cease to hum
during the night. This is also evident from those insects with which
we are most familiar, for they not only remain quiet during the night
because they cannot see distinctly, for all creatures with hard eyes
have indistinct vision, but they seem no less quiet when the light of a
lamp is set before them.

6. Man sleeps the most of all animals. Infants and young children do
not dream at all, but dreaming begins in most at about four or five
years old. There have been men and women who have never dreamt at
all; sometimes such persons, when they have advanced in age, begin
to dream; this has preceded a change in their body, either for death
or infirmity. This, then, is the manner of sensation, sleep and
wakefulness.


CHAPTER XI.

1. In some animals the sexes are distinct, in others they are not
so, these are said to beget and be with young by a likeness to other
creatures. There is neither male nor female in fixed animals, nor in
testacea. In the malacia and malacostraca there are male and female
individuals, and in all animals with feet, whether they have two or
four, which produce either an animal, an egg, or a worm from coition.

2. In other kinds the sexes are either single or not single; as in all
quadrupeds there is the male and female, in the testacea it is not
so, for as some vegetables are fertile and others barren, so it is in
these. Among insects and fishes there are some that have no differences
of this kind, as the eel is neither male nor female, nor is anything
produced from them.

3. But those persons who say that some eels appear to have creatures
like worms, of the size of a hair, attached to them, speak without
observation, not having seen how they really are; for none of these
creatures are viviparous without being first oviparous, none of them
have ever been observed to contain ova; those that are viviparous have
the embryo attached to the uterus, and not to the abdomen, for there it
would be digested like food. The distinction made between the so-called
male and female eel that the male has a larger and longer head, and
that the head of the female is smaller, and more rounded, is a generic,
and not a sexual distinction.

4. There are some fish called epitragiæ, and among fresh-water fish the
cyprinus and balagrus are of the same nature, which never have ova or
semen; those which are firm and fat, and have a small intestine, appear
to be the best. There are creatures, such as the testacea, and plants,
which beget, and produce young, but have no organ of coition; and so
also in fishes the psetus,[156] erythrhinus,[157] and the channa. All
these appear to have ova.

[156] Pleuronectes Lingua and Rhombus.

[157] Perca marina, or Sparus erithrinus.

5. In sanguineous animals with feet that are not oviparous, the males
are generally larger and longer lived than the females, except the
hemionus, but the females of this animal are both larger and longer
lived; in oviparous and viviparous animals, as in fish and insects, the
females are larger than the males, as the serpent, phalangium,[158]
ascalabotes,[159] and frog; in fish likewise, as in most of the small
gregarious selache, and all that inhabit rocks.

[158] Aranca tarantula.

[159] Lacerta Gekko.

6. It is evident that female fishes have longer lives than males,
because females are caught of a greater age than the males; the upper
and more forward parts of all animals are larger and stronger, and more
firmly built in the male; the hinder and lower parts in the female.
This is the case in the human subject, and all viviparous animals with
feet: the female is less sinewy, the joints are weaker, and the hairs
finer, in those with hair; in those without hair, its analogues are of
the same nature; the female has softer flesh and weaker knees than the
male, the legs are slighter; the feet of females are more graceful, in
all that have these members.

7. All females, also, have a smaller and more acute voice than the
males, but in oxen the females utter a deeper sound than the males; the
parts denoting strength, as the teeth, tusks, horns, and spurs, and
such other parts, are possessed by the males, but not by the females,
as the roe-deer has none, and the hens of some birds with spurs have
none; the sow has no tusks: in some animals they exist in both sexes,
only stronger and longer in the males, as the horns of bulls are
stronger than those of cows.




BOOK THE FIFTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. We have hitherto treated of the external and internal parts of all
animals, of their senses, voice, and sleep, with the distinctions
between the males and females; it remains to treat of their generation,
speaking first of those which come first in order, for they are many,
and have numerous varieties, partly dissimilar, and partly like each
other. And we will pursue the same order in considering them as we did
before in their division into classes; we commenced our consideration
by treating of the parts in man, but now he must be treated of last,
because he is much more intricate.

2. We shall begin with the testacea, and after these treat of the
malacostraca, and the others in the order of their succession. These
are the malacia and insects, next to these fishes, both viviparous and
oviparous; next to them birds, and afterwards we must treat of animals
with feet, whether viviparous or oviparous; some viviparous creatures
have four feet, man alone has two feet. The nature of animals and
vegetables is similar, for some are produced from the seed of other
plants, and others are of spontaneous growth, being derived from some
origin of a similar nature. Some of them acquire their nourishment
from the soil, others from different plants, as it was observed when
treating of plants.

3. So also some animals are produced from animals of a similar form,
the origin of others is spontaneous, and not from similar forms; from
these and from plants are divided those which spring from putrid
matter, this is the case with many insects; others originate in the
animals themselves, and from the excrementitious matter in their parts;
those which originate from similar animals, and have both the sexes
are produced from coition, but of the class of fishes there are some
neither male nor female, these belong to the same class among fishes,
but to different genera, and some are quite peculiar. In some there
are females but no males, by these the species is continued as in the
hypenemia among birds.

4. All these among birds are barren, (for nature is able to complete
them as far as the formation of an egg,) unless persons suppose that
there is another method of communicating the male influence, concerning
which we shall speak more plainly hereafter. In some fish, after the
spontaneous production of the ovum, it happens that living creatures
are produced, some by themselves, others by the aid of the male. The
manner in which this is done will be made plain in a future place, for
nearly the same things take place in the class of birds.

5. Whatever are produced spontaneously in living creatures, in the
earth, or in plants, or in any part of them, have a distinction in the
sexes, and by the union of the sexes something is produced, not the
same in any respect, but an imperfect animal, as nits are produced from
lice, and from flies and butterflies are produced egg-like worms, from
which neither similar creatures are produced, nor any other creature,
but such things only. First of all, then, we will treat of coition, and
of the animals that copulate, and then of others, and successively of
that which is peculiar to each, and that which is common to them all.


CHAPTER II.

1. Those animals in which there is a distinction of the sexes use
sexual intercourse, but the mode of this intercourse is not the same
in all, for all the males of sanguineous animals with feet have an
appropriate organ, but they do not all approach the female in the same
manner, but those which are retromingent, as the lion, the hare, and
the lynx, unite backwards, and the female hare often mounts upon the
male; in almost all the rest the mode is the same, for most animals
perform the act of intercourse in the same way, the male mounting upon
the female; and birds perform it in this way only.

2. There are, however, some variations even among birds; for the male
sometimes unites with the female as she sits upon the ground, as the
bustard and domestic fowl: in others, the female does not sit upon
the ground, as the crane; for in these birds the male unites with
the female standing up; and the act is performed very quickly, as in
sparrows. Bears lie down during the act of intercourse, which is
performed in the same manner as in those that stand on their feet, the
abdomen of the male being placed upon the back of the female: in the
hedgehogs, the abdomens of both sexes are in contact.

3. Among the large animals, the roe-deer seldom admits the stag, nor
the cow the bull, on account of the hardness of the penis; but the
female receives the male by submission. This has been observed to take
place in tame deer. The male and female wolf copulate like dogs. Cats
do not approach each other backwards, but the male stands erect, and
the female places herself beneath him. The females are very lascivious,
and invite the male, and make a noise during the intercourse.

4. Camels copulate as the female is lying down, and the male embraces
and unites with her, not backwards, but like other animals. They remain
in intercourse a whole day. They retire into a desert place, and suffer
no one to approach them but their feeder. The penis of the camel is
so strong, that bowstrings are made of it. Elephants also retire into
desert places for intercourse, especially by the sides of rivers which
they usually frequent. The female bends down and divides her legs, and
the male mounts upon her. The seal copulates like retromingent animals,
and is a long while about it, like dogs. The males have a large penis.


CHAPTER III.

1. Oviparous quadrupeds with feet copulate in the same manner: in some,
the male mounts upon the female, like viviparous animals, as in the
marine and land turtle, for they have an intromittent organ by which
they adhere together, as the trygon and frog, and all such animals.

2. But the apodous long animals, as serpents and murænæ, are folded
together, with the abdomens opposite, and serpents roll themselves
together so closely, that they seem to be but one serpent with two
heads. The manner of the whole race of saurians is the same, for they
unite together in the same kind of fold.


CHAPTER IV.

1. All fish, except the flat selache, perform the act of intercourse
by approaching each other with their abdomens opposite: but the
flat fish, with tails, as the batos, trygon, and such like, not only
approach each other, but the male applies his abdomen to the back of
the female, in all those in which the thickness of the tail offers no
impediment. But the rhinæ, and those which have a large tail, perform
the act by the friction of their abdomens against each other, and some
persons say that they have seen the male selache united to the back of
the female, like dogs.

2. In all those that resemble the selache, the female is larger
than the male; and in nearly all fish the female is larger than the
male. The selache are those which have been mentioned; and the bos,
lamia, æetus, narce, batrachus, and all the galeode. All the selache
have been frequently observed to conduct themselves in this way. In
all viviparous creatures the act occupies a longer time than in the
oviparous. The dolphin and the cetacea also perform the act in the same
manner, for the male attaches himself to the female for neither a very
long, nor a very short time.

3. The males of some of the fish which resemble the selache differ from
the females, in having two appendages near the anus, which the females
have not, as in the galeodea; for these appendages exist in them all.
Neither fish nor any other apodal animal has testicles, but the males,
both of serpents and of fish, have two passages, which become full of a
seminal fluid at the season of coition; and all of them project a milky
fluid. These passages unite in one, as they do in birds; for birds have
two internal testes, and so have all oviparous animals with feet. In
the act of coition this single passage passes to, and is extended upon
the pudendum and receptacle of the female.

4. In viviparous animals with feet, the external passage for the
semen and the fluid excrement is the same: internally these passages
are distinct, as I said before in describing the distinctive parts
of animals. In animals which have no bladder, the anus is externally
united with the passage of the semen, internally the passages are
close together; and this is the same in both sexes: for none of them
have a bladder, except the tortoise. The female of this animal, though
furnished with a bladder, has but one passage; but the tortoise is
oviparous.

5. The sexual intercourse of the oviparous fish is less evident,
wherefore many persons suppose that the female is impregnated by
swallowing the semen of the male; and they have been frequently
observed to do this. This is seen at the season of coition, when the
females follow the males, and are observed to strike them on the
abdomen with their mouths, this causes the males to eject their semen
more rapidly. The males do the same with the ova of the females, for
they swallow them as they are extruded, and the fish are born from
those ova which remain.

6. In Phœnicia they use each sex for capturing the other; for having
taken the male cestreus, they entice the females with it, and so
enclose them in a net. They use the females in the same way for
catching the males. The frequent observation of these circumstances
appears to corroborate this manner of intercourse among them.
Quadrupeds also do the same thing, for at the season of coition both
sexes emit a fluid, and smell to each other's pudenda.

7. And if the wind blows from the cock partridge to the hen, these last
are impregnated; and often, if they hear the voice of the cock when
they are inclined for sexual intercourse, or if he flies over them,
they become pregnant from the breath of the cock. During the act of
intercourse, both sexes open their mouths, and protrude their tongues.
The true intercourse of oviparous fish is rarely observed, from the
rapidity with which the act is accomplished; for their intercourse has
been observed to take place in the manner described.


CHAPTER V.

1. All the malacia, as the polypus, sepia, and teuthis, approach each
other in the same manner, for they are united mouth to mouth; the
tentacula of one sex being adapted to those of the other; for when
the polypus has fixed the part called the head upon the ground, it
extends its tentacula, which the other adapts to the expansion of its
tentacula, and they make their acetabula answer together. And some
persons say that the male has an organ like a penis in that one of
its tentacula which contains the two largest acetabula. This organ is
sinewy, as far as the middle of the tentaculum, and they say that it is
all inserted into the nostril of the female.

2. The sepia and loligo swim about coiled together in this way,
and with their mouths and tentacula united, they swim in contrary
directions to each other. They adapt the organ called the nostril
of the male to the similar organ in the female; and the one swims
forwards, and the other backwards. The ova of the female are produced
in the part called the physeter, by means of which some persons say
that they copulate.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The malacostraca, as the carabi, astaci, carides, and such like
perform the act of intercourse like the retromingent animals, the one
lying upon its back, and the other placing its tail upon it. They
copulate on the approach of spring, near the land; for their sexual
intercourse has often been observed, and sometimes when the figs begin
to ripen.

2. The astaci and the carides perform the act in the same manner; but
the carcini approximate the fore part of their bodies to each other,
and adapt also the folds of their tails to each other. First of all,
the smaller carcinus mounts from behind, and when he has mounted, the
greater one turns on its side. In no other respect does the female
differ from the male, but that the tail, which is folded on the body,
is larger and more distant, and more thick set with appendages: upon
this the ova are deposited, and the excrement ejected. Neither sex is
furnished with an intromittent organ.


CHAPTER VII.

1. Insects approach each other from behind, and the smaller one
subsequently mounts upon the larger. The male is always the smaller.
The female, which is below, inserts a member into the male, which is
above, and not the male into the female, as in other animals. In some
kinds this organ appears large in proportion to the size of the body,
especially in those that are small, in others it is less. The organ may
be plainly discerned if two flies are separated while in the act of
coition. They are separated from each other with difficulty, for the
act of intercourse in such animals occupies a long time. This may be
plainly discerned by common observation, as in the fly and cantharis.

2. All adopt the same method, the fly, cantharis, spondyla[160],
phalangium, or any other insect that copulates. All the phalangia that
spin a web unite in the following manner. The female draws a filament
from the middle of the web, and then the male draws it back again,
and this they do a great many times till they meet, and are united
backwards, for this kind of copulation suits them on account of the
size of their abdomen. The copulation of animals is accomplished in
this manner.

[160] A beetle living at the roots of trees, Carabus.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. All animals have their proper season and age for coition; the nature
of most creatures requires them to have intercourse with each other
when winter is turning into summer. This is the spring season, in
which all animals with wings, feet, or fins, are incited to coition.
Some copulate and produce their young in the autumn and winter, as
some aquatic and winged creatures. Mankind are ready at all seasons,
and so are many other animals which associate with man; this arises
from greater warmth, and better food, and is usual among those which
are pregnant only for a short time, as the hog, dog, and those birds
which have frequent broods. Many animals appear to adapt the season of
coition to that which they consider the best for the nurture of their
young.

2. Among mankind the male is more disposed for sexual intercourse in
the winter, and the female in the summer. Birds, as I have observed,
generally pair in the spring and summer, except the halcyon. This bird
hatches its young about the time of the winter solstice. Whereupon fine
days occurring at this season are called halcyon days, seven before the
solstice and seven after it. As Simonides also writes in his poems, "as
when in the winter months Jupiter prepares fourteen days, which mortals
call the windless season, the sacred nurse of the variegated halcyon."

3. These fine days take place wherever it happens that the solstice
turns to the south, when the pleiades set in the north. The bird is
said to occupy seven days in building its nest, and the other seven in
bringing out and nursing its young. The halcyon days are not always
met with in this country at the time of the solstice, but they always
occur in the Sicilian Sea. The halcyon produces five eggs.

4. The æthuia and the larus hatch their young among the rocks on the
sea-side, and produce two or three, the larus during the summer, and
the æthuia at the beginning of the spring, immediately after the
equinox; it sets upon its eggs like other birds; neither of these kinds
conceal themselves. The halcyon is the rarest of all, for it is only
seen at the season of the setting of the pleiades, and at the solstice,
and it first appears at seaports, flying as much as round a ship, and
immediately vanishing away. Stesichorus also speaks of it in the same
manner.

5. The nightingale produces her young at the beginning of summer. She
produces five or six eggs. She conceals herself from the autumn to the
beginning of spring. Insects copulate and produce their young during
the winter whenever the days are fine, and the wind in the south, at
least such of them as do not conceal themselves, as the fly and ant.
Wild animals produce their young once a year, unless, like the hare,
they breed while they are nursing their young.


CHAPTER IX.

1. Fish also generally breed once a year, as the chyti. All those which
are caught in a net are called chyti; the thynnus, palamis, cestreus,
chalais, colias, chromis, psetta, and such like, the labrax is an
exception, for this alone of them all breeds twice a year, and the
second fry of these are much weaker. The trichias[161] and rock fish
breed twice, the trigla is the only one that breeds three times a year.
This is shewn by the fry, which appear three times at certain places.

[161] Clupea Sprottus.

2. The scorpius breeds twice, and so does the sargus, in spring and
autumn, the salpa once only in the spring. The thynnis breeds once, but
as some of the fry are produced at first, and others afterwards, it
appears to breed twice. The first fry makes its appearance in the month
of December, after the solstice, the second in the spring. The male
thynnis is different from the female, for the female has a fin under
the abdomen, called aphareus, which the male has not.

3. Among the selachea, the rhine alone breeds twice in the year; at
the beginning of the autumn, and at the period of the setting of
the Pleiades. The young are, however, better in the autumn. At each
breeding season it produces seven or eight. Some of the galei, as the
asterias, seem to produce their ova twice every month. This arises from
all the ova not being perfected at once.

4. Some fish produce ova at all seasons of the year, as the muræna: for
this fish produces many ova, and the fry rapidly increase in size, as
do those also of the hippurus,[162] for these, from being very small,
rapidly increase to a great size; but the muræna produces young at
all seasons, the hippurus in the spring. The smyrus differs from the
muræna, for the muræna is throughout variegated and weak. The smyrus is
of one colour, and strong; its colour is that of the pine tree, and it
has teeth both internally and externally. They say that these are the
male and the female, as in others. These creatures go upon the land,
and are often taken.

[162] Coryphœna hippurus.

5. The growth of all fish is rapid, and not the least so in the
coracinus among small fish. It breeds near the land, in thick places
full of seaweed. The orphos also grows rapidly. The pelamis and thynnus
breed in Pontus, and nowhere else. The cestreus, chrysophrys, and
labrax, breed near the mouths of rivers. The orcynes and scorpides, and
many other kinds, in the sea.

6. Most fish breed in March, April, and May; a few in the autumn, as
the salpe, sargus, and all the others of this kind a little before
the autumnal equinox; and the narce and rhine also. Some breed in the
winter and summer, as I before observed, as the labrax, cestreus, and
belona in the winter; the thynnis in June, about the summer solstice:
it produces, as it were, a bag, containing many minute ova. The rhyas
also breeds in the summer. The chelones among the cestræi begin to
breed in the month of December, and so does the sargus, the myxon, as
it is called, and the cephalus. They go with young thirty days. Some of
the cestrei do not originate in coition, but are produced from mud and
sand.

7. The greater number of them contain ova in the spring, but some, as
I observed, in the summer, autumn, and winter. But this does not take
place in all alike, nor singly, nor in every kind, as it does in most
fish which produce their young in the spring: nor do they produce as
many ova at other seasons. But it must not escape our notice, that as
different countries make a great difference in plants and animals, not
only in the habit of their body, but also in the frequency of their
sexual intercourse and production of young; so different localities
make a great difference in fish, not only in their size, and habit of
their body, but in their young, and the frequency or rarity of their
sexual intercourse, and of their offspring in this place or that.


CHAPTER X.

1. The malacia breed in the spring, and first of all the marine sepia,
though this one breeds at all seasons. It produces its ova in fifteen
days. When the ova are extruded, the male follows, and ejects his ink
upon them, when they become hard. They go about in pairs. The male is
more variegated than the female, and blacker on the back. The sexes of
the polypus unite in the winter, the young are produced in the spring,
when these creatures conceal themselves for two months. It produces
an ovum like long hair, similar to the fruit of the white poplar. The
fecundity of this animal is very great, for a great number of young
are produced from its ova. The male differs from the female in having
a longer head, and the part of the tentaculum which the fishermen call
the penis is white. It incubates upon the ova it produces, so that it
becomes out of condition, and is not sought after at this season.

2. The purpuræ produce their ova in the spring, the ceryx at the end
of the winter; and, on the whole, the testacea appear to contain ova
in the spring and autumn, except the eatable echini. These principally
produce their young at the same seasons, but they always contain some
ova, and especially at the full and new moon, and in fine weather, but
those which live in the Euripus of the Pyrrhæi are better in winter.
They are a small kind but full of ova. All the cochleæ appear to
contain ova at the same season.


CHAPTER XI.

1. The undomesticated birds, as it was observed, generally pair and
breed once a-year. The swallows and cottyphus breed twice, but
the first brood of the cottyphus is killed by the cold, for it is
the earliest breeder of all birds. It is able, however, to bring
up the other brood. But the domestic birds, and those capable of
domestication, breed frequently, as pigeons during the whole summer,
and domestic fowls. For these birds have sexual intercourse, and
produce eggs all the year round, except at the winter solstice.

2. There are many kinds of pigeons, for the peleias and peristera
are different. The peleias is the smaller, but the peristera is more
readily tamed. The peleias is black and small, and has red and rough
feet, for which reason it is never domesticated. The phatta is the
largest of the tribe, the next is the œnas, which is a little larger
than the peristera, the trygon is the least of all. If the peristera
is supplied with a warm place and appropriate food, it will breed and
bring up its young at any season of the year. If it is not properly
supplied, it will only breed in the summer. Its young ones are best
during the spring and autumn, those produced in the hot weather in
summer are the worst.


CHAPTER XII.

1. Animals also differ in the age at which sexual intercourse
commences. For in the first place the period at which the spermatic
fluid begins to be secreted, and the age of puberty is not the same,
but different; for the young of all animals are barren, or if they do
possess the power of reproduction, their offspring are weak and small.
This is very conspicuous in mankind, and in viviparous quadrupeds and
birds, for in the one the offspring, in the other the eggs, are small.
The age of puberty is nearly the same in the individuals of each kind,
unless any alteration takes place, either as ominous, or from an injury
done to their nature.

2. In men this period of life is shown by the change of voice, and not
only by the size but by the form of the pudendum and of the breasts in
women, but especially by the growth of hair on the pubes. The secretion
of the spermatic fluid commences about the age of fourteen, the power
of reproduction at twenty-one. Other animals have no hair on the pubes,
for some have no hair at all, and others have none upon their under
side, or less than on their upper side, but the change of the voice is
conspicuous in some of them. And in others different parts of the body
signify the period of the formation of the semen, and of the power of
reproduction.

3. In almost all animals the voice of the female and of the young is
more acute than that of the male and the older animals, for even the
stags have a deeper voice than their females. The males utter their cry
at the season of copulation, the females when they are alarmed. The
voice of the female is short, that of the male longer. And the barking
of old dogs is also deeper than of young ones, and the voice of the
horse also varies. The females utter a little small cry as soon as they
are born, and the males do the same, but their voice is deeper than
that of the female, and as they grow older, it still increases. When
they are two years old, and reach puberty, the male utters a great deep
voice, that of the female is greater and clearer than it was at first;
this continues till they are twenty years old at the outside, and after
that the voice, both of the male and female, becomes weaker.

4. For the most part, then, as we observed, the voice of the male
differs from that of the female in depth, in those animals which utter
a lengthened sound. There are, however, some exceptions, as oxen; for
in these animals the voice of the female is deeper than that of the
male, and the voice of the calf than that of the full-grown animal;
wherefore also in the castrated animals, the voice changes the other
way, for it becomes more like that of the female.

5. The following are the ages at which animals acquire the power of
reproduction. The sheep and goat arrive at puberty within a year
after they are born, and especially the goat, and the males as well
as the females, but the offspring of these males and of the others is
different. For the males are better the second year than when they
become older. In hogs, the male and female unite at eight months old,
and the female produces her young when she is a year old, for this
agrees with the period of gestation. The male reaches puberty at eight
months old, but his offspring are useless till he is a year old. But
these periods, as we have said, are not always the same, for swine
will sometimes copulate when they are four months old, so as to have
young and nurse them at six months old, and boars sometimes reach
puberty at ten months old, and continue good to three years old.

6. The bitch reaches puberty within a year after birth, and so does the
dog, and sometimes this takes place at the end of eight months, but
more frequently in the male than in the female. The period of gestation
is sixty days, or one or two, or perhaps three days more, but never
less than sixty days, or if they produce young in a less time, it never
comes to perfection. The bitch is ready for sexual intercourse again in
six months, but never sooner. The horse reaches puberty in both sexes
at two years old, and is capable of reproduction, but its offspring at
that age are small and weakly. For the most part, sexual intercourse
begins at three years of age, and the colts continue to improve from
that period till they are twenty years old. The male is useful till he
is thirty years old, so that he can beget during almost the whole of
his life, for the horse generally lives five-and-thirty years, and the
mare more than forty, and a horse has been known to live seventy-five
years.

7. The ass reaches puberty in both sexes at the age of thirty months;
they rarely, however, produce young till they are three years, or
three years and six months old. But it has been known to be pregnant
and bring up its young within the year. The cow also has been known to
produce young and rear it within the year after birth, which grew to
the ordinary size, and no more.[163]

[163] This probably means "to such a size as might be expected from the
early age of the parent."

8. These are the periods of puberty in these animals. The seventieth
year in man, and the fiftieth in woman, is the latest period of
reproduction, and this happens rarely, for only a few have had children
at this time of life. Sixty-five is generally the boundary in one sex,
and forty-five in the other. The sheep produces young till it is eight
years old, and, if well treated, until it is eleven, though the act of
copulation is continued in both sexes during the whole period of life.

9. Fat goats are rarely productive, wherefore they compare barren vines
with barren goats, but they are productive when they are lean. The
rams copulate with the old sheep first, but they do not follow after
the younger; and the younger, as I before observed, produce a smaller
offspring than the older.

10. A wild boar will beget till he is three years old, but the
progeny of older animals is inferior; for he has not the same power
or strength. He generally goes to the female when full of food, and
without having been to another female, or, if not, the act of coition
is of shorter duration, and the progeny smaller. The sow produces the
smallest number of pigs at her first litter, but at the second they
are more flourishing. She also produces young when old, but the act of
coition is longer. At fifteen years old, she no longer produces young,
but becomes fierce.

11. If well-fed, she will be more ready for sexual intercourse, whether
young or old; and, if rapidly fattened when pregnant, she has less milk
after parturition. As regards the age of the parent, the young of those
in the prime of their age are the best, and those that are born at the
beginning of winter. The worst are those born in the summer, for they
are small, and thin, and weak. If the male is well fed, he is ready
for sexual intercourse at all seasons, by day as well as by night; but
if not well fed, he is most ready in the morning, and as he grows old,
he becomes less disposed for it, as was said before. And it frequently
happens that those which are impotent, through age or weakness, and
cannot copulate readily, will approach the female as she lies down
tired with long standing. The sow generally becomes pregnant when she
hangs down her ears in her heats; if she is not pregnant, she becomes
heated again.

12. Bitches do not copulate during the whole of their life, but only
to a certain period. Their coition and pregnancy generally takes
place till they are twelve years old, but both males and females have
been known to perform the act of coition at eighteen and even twenty
years of age; but old age takes away from both sexes the power of
reproduction, as in other animals.

13. The camel is retroningent, and performs the act of intercourse in
the manner already described; the period of its coition in Arabia is
in the month of September; the female goes with young twelve months,
and produces one foal, for the animal is one of those which produce but
one. Both the male and female arrive at puberty at the age of three
years, and the female is ready for the male again at the end of a year
after parturition.

14. The elephant arrives at puberty, the earliest at ten years of age,
the latest at fifteen, and the male at five or six years old. The
season for the intercourse of the sexes is in the spring: and the male
is ready again at the end of three years, but he never touches again
a female whom he has once impregnated. Her period of gestation is two
years, and then she produces one calf, for the elephant belongs to the
class of animals which have but one young one at a time. The young one
is as large as a calf of two or three months old. This, then, is the
nature of the sexual intercourse of those animals which perform this
function.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. We must now treat of the mode of reproduction, both of those animals
which use sexual intercourse, and those which do not; and, first of
all, we will speak of the testacea, for this is the only entire class
which is not reproduced by sexual intercourse. The purpuræ collect
together in the spring, and produce what is called their nidamental
capsules (melicera), for it is like honey-comb, though not so deeply
cut, but, as it were, made up of the white pods of vetches. These
capsules have neither opening nor perforation, nor are the purpuræ
produced from them; but both these and other testacea are produced from
mud and putrefaction. But this substance is an excrementitious matter
both in the purpura and the ceryx, for these last also produce similar
capsules.

2. The testacea which produce these capsules are generated in the
same way as the rest of their class, but more readily when there are
homogeneous particles pre-existing among them; for, when they deposit
their nidamental capsules, they emit a clammy mucus, from which the
scales of the capsules are formed. When all these have been deposited,
they emit upon the ground a sort of chyle, and small purpuræ spring up
upon the same spot and adhere to the larger purpuræ, though some of
these can hardly be distinguished by their form. But if they are taken
before the breeding season, they will sometimes breed in the baskets,
not indeed anywhere, but they collect together like they do in the
sea, and the narrow limits of their place of captivity make them hang
together like bunches of fruit.

3. There are many kinds of purpuræ, some of which are large, as those
which are found near Sigeum and Lectum; and others are small, as those
in the Euripus and on the Carian coast. Those found in gulfs are large
and rough. Most of them contain a black pigment; in others it is red,
and the quantity of it small. Some of the largest weigh as much as a
mina. Near the shore and on the coast they are small, and the pigment
is red. Those which are natives of the north contain a black pigment;
in those of the south it is red, generally speaking.

4. They are taken in the spring, about the time that they deposit their
capsules, but they are never taken during the dog-days, for then they
do not feed, but conceal themselves and get out of the way. The pigment
is contained between the mecon and the neck. The union of these parts
is thick, and the colour is like a white membrane; this is taken away.
When this is bruised, the pigment wets and stains the hand. Something
resembling a vein passes through it, and this appears to be the
pigment; the nature of the rest resembles alum.[164] The pigment is the
worst at the period of depositing their nidamental capsules.

[164] Evidently a corrupt reading.

5. The small ones are pounded up, shells and all, for it is not easy to
separate them; but they separate the larger kinds from the shells, and
then extract the pigment. For this purpose the mecon is divided from
the neck, for the pigment lies above the part called the stomach, and
when this is taken away, they are divided asunder. They are careful to
bruise them while alive, for if they die before they are cut up, they
vomit up the pigment; for this reason they keep them in the baskets
till a sufficient number is collected, and there is time to procure the
pigment.

6. The ancients did not let down or fasten any basket-net to their
baits, so that it often happened that the purpura fell off as they
were drawn up; but at the present time they use basket-nets, in order
that if the purpura should fall off, it may not be lost. They are most
likely to fall off when full, but when empty it is difficult to draw
them from the bait. These are the peculiarities of the purpura. The
nature of the ceryx is the same as that of the purpura, and so are
their seasons.

7. They both have opercula, and so have all turbinated shell-fish, from
the period of their birth. They feed by forcing out their tongue, as
it is called, beneath the operculum: the purpura has a tongue larger
than a finger, with which it feeds upon and pierces the conchylia, and
even the shells of its own species. Both the purpura and the ceryx are
long-lived, for the purpura lives six years, and its annual increase is
seen in the divisions on the helix of its shell.

8. The mya also deposits nidamental capsules; those which are called
limnostrea are the first to originate in muddy places, but the conchæ,
chemæ, solens, and pectens find their subsistence in sandy shores;
the pinnæ grow up from their byssus both in sandy and muddy shores.
The pinnæ always contain a pinnophylax, either like a small caris or
cancer, and soon die when this is extracted. On the whole, all the
testacea are produced spontaneously in mud different kinds originating
in different sorts of mud: the ostrea is found in mud, the conchæ and
others that have been mentioned in sand. The tethya, balanus, and
others which live on the surface, as the patella and nerita, originate
in holes in the rocks. All these reach maturity very soon, especially
the purpuræ and pectens, for they are matured in one year.

9. Very small white cancri are produced in some of the testacea,
especially in the myæ that inhabit muddy places, and next to this in
the pinnæ those which are called pinnoteræ; they occur also in the
pectens and limnostrea. These animals apparently never grow; and the
fishermen say that they are produced at the same time as the creatures
they inhabit. The pectens disappear for some time in the sand, and
so do the purpuræ. The ostrea (bivalves) are produced in the manner
described, for some of them originate in shallow water, others near the
shore, or among rocks, or in rough hard places, or in sand; and some
have the power of locomotion, others have not.

10. Among those that are not locomotive, the pinnæ are fixed; the
solens and conchæ remain on one spot, though not fixed, and do not
survive separation from their home. The nature of the aster[165] is
so hot, that if it is captured immediately after swallowing anything,
its food is found digested; and they say that it is very troublesome
in the Pyrrhæan Euripus. Its form is like the paintings of a star. The
creatures called pneumones are spontaneously produced. The shell which
painters use is very thick, and the pigment is produced on the outside
of the shell; they are principally found in the neighbourhood of Caria.

[165] Star-fish.

11. The carcinium also originates in earth and mud, and afterwards
makes its way into an empty shell, and when it grows too large for
that, it leaves it for a larger one, as the shell of the nerita,
strombus, and such like; it frequently occurs in the small ceryx. When
it has entered the shell, it carries it about and lives in it, except
that as it grows it migrates into a larger shell.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. The nature of the testacea is the same as that of creatures without
shells, as the cnidæ[166] and sponges, which inhabit the holes in
rocks. There are two kinds of cnidæ, some which live in holes in the
rocks, and cannot be separated from them, and other migrating species
which live upon the smooth flat surface of the rocks. (The patella also
is free and locomotive.) In the interior of the sponges are found the
creatures called pinnophylaces, and the interior is closed with a net
like a spider's web, and small fish are captured by opening and closing
this web, for it opens as they approach, and closes upon them when they
have entered.

[166] Actinia.

2. There are three kinds of sponges; one of them is thin, the other
is thick, and the third, which is called the Achillean sponge, is
slender, compact, and very strong; it is placed beneath helmets and
thigh-pieces, for the sake of deadening the sound of blows; this kind
is very rare. Among the compact kinds, those which are very hard and
rough are called tragi. They all grow upon the rock or near the shore,
and obtain their food from the mud. This is evident, for they are full
of mud when they are captured. This is the case with all other fixed
things, that they derive their food from the spot to which they are
attached.

3. The compact species are weaker than those which are thin, because
their point of attachment is smaller. It is affirmed that the sponge
possesses sensation; this is a proof of it, that it contracts if it
perceives any purpose of tearing it up, and renders the task more
difficult. The sponge does the same thing when the winds and waves
are violent, that it may not lose its point of attachment. There are
some persons who dispute this, as the natives of Torona. The sponge is
inhabited by worms and other living creatures, which the rock-fish eat
when the sponge is torn up, as well as the remainder of its roots. But
if the sponge is broken off, it grows again, and is completed from the
portion that is left.

4. The thin sponges are the largest, and they are most abundant on
the Lycian coast; the compact sponges are softer, and the Achillean
are more harsh than the others. On the whole, those that inhabit deep
places with a mild temperature are the softest, for wind and cold
weather harden them, as they do other growing things, and stop their
increase. For this reason the sponges of the Hellespont are rough and
compact; and, altogether, those beyond Malea, and those on this side,
differ in softness and hardness.

5. Neither should the heat be very great, for the sponge becomes
rotten, like plants, wherefore those near the shore are the best,
especially if the water is deep near the land, for the temperature is
moderated by the depth. When alive, before they are washed, they are
black. Their point of attachment is neither single nor dispersed over
the whole surface, for there are empty passages between the points of
attachment. Something like a membrane is extended over their lower
part, and the attachment is by several points; on the upper part are
other closed passages, and four or five which are apparent. Wherefore
some persons say that these are the organs by which they take their
food.

6. There is also another species called aplysia, because it cannot
be washed. This has very large passages; but the other parts of the
substance are quite compact. When cut open it is more compact and
smooth than the sponge, and the whole is like a lung; of all the
sponges this one is confessed to have the most sensation, and to be
the most enduring. They are plainly seen in the sea near the sponges,
for the other sponges are white as the mud settles down upon them, but
these are always black. This is the mode of production in sponges and
testacea.


CHAPTER XV.

1. Among the malacostraca the carabi are impregnated by sexual
intercourse, and contain their ova during three months, May, June, and
July. They afterwards deposit them upon the hollow part of their folded
tail, and their ova grow like worms. The same thing takes place in the
malacia and oviparous fish, for their ova always grow.

2. The ova of the carabi are sandy, and divided into eight parts;
for a cartilaginous appendage, round which the ova are attached, is
united to each of the opercula at their junction with the side; and the
whole resembles a bunch of grapes, for every one of the cartilaginous
appendages is frequently subdivided, and the divisions are apparent to
any one who will separate them, but when first seen they appear to be
united. Those ova which are in the centre are larger than those which
are contiguous to the perforation, and the last are the least.

3. The smallest ova are as large as millet; the ova are not continuous
with the perforation, but in the middle. For two divisions extend on
each side, from the tail and from the thorax, and this is also the line
of junction for the opercula. The ova, which are placed at the side,
cannot be enclosed, unless the extremity of the tail is drawn over
them; this, however, covers them like a lid.

4. The female, in depositing her ova, appears to collect them on the
cartilaginous appendages by means of the broad part of the folded tail.
She produces them by pressing with her tail and bending her body. These
cartilaginous processes at the season of oviposition increase in size,
in order to become appropriate receptacles for the ova. The ova are
deposited on these processes, as those of the sepia are deposited upon
broken pieces of wood or anything floating in the sea. This is the
manner of depositing them; but after they have been ripened twenty
days, they are cast off altogether in a mass, as they appear when
separated from the parent; in fifteen days, at the outside, the carabi
are produced from these ova, and they are often taken off less than
a finger's length. The ova are produced before Arcturus, and after
Arcturus they are cast off.

5. The cyphæ among the carides contain their ova about four months.
The carabi are found in rough and rocky places, the astaci in those
that are smooth; but neither of them inhabit mud. For this cause the
astaci are found in the Hellespont and near Thasus; the carabi in the
neighbourhood of Sigeum and Athos. Fishermen, when they pursue their
calling in the open sea, distinguish the rough and muddy places by the
nature of the shore, and other signs. In the spring and winter they
come near the shore; in summer time they go into deep water, sometimes
for the sake of warmth, and sometimes for the cold.

6. Those called arcti[167] breed nearly at the same time as the carabi,
wherefore they are most excellent in winter and in spring before the
breeding season, and they are worst after they have deposited their
ova. They change their shell in the spring, like the serpent, which
puts off its old age, as it is called. Both the carabi and the carcini
do this when they are young, as well as afterwards. All the carabi are
long-lived.

[167] Perhaps, Cancer spinosissimus.


CHAPTER XVI.

1. The malacia produce a white ovum after sexual intercourse; in the
course of time this becomes sandy, like that of the testacea. The
polypus deposits its ova in holes or pots, or any other hollow place;
the ovum is like bunches of the wild vine and of the white poplar, as
was observed before; when the ova are produced they remain suspended
from the hole in which they were deposited; and the ova are so
numerous, that when taken out they will fill a vessel much larger than
the head of the polypus in which they were contained.

2. About fifty days afterwards the young polypi burst the eggs and
escape, like phalangia, in great numbers. The particular shape of each
limb is not distinct, though the general form is plain. Many of them
perish from their small size and debility. Some have been observed so
small that they could not be distinguished, unless they were touched,
when they were seen to move.

3. The sepia also deposits eggs, which resemble large, black, myrtle
seeds. They are united together like a bunch of fruit, and are enclosed
in a substance which prevents them from separating readily. The male
emits his ink upon them, a mucous fluid, which causes their slippery
appearance. The ova increase in this way; and when first produced they
are white, but when they have touched the ink they become large and
black. When the young sepia, which is entirely formed of the internal
white of the ovum, is produced, it makes its way out by the rupture of
the membrane of the ovum.

4. The ovum which the female first produces is like hail, and to this
the young sepia is attached by the head, as birds are attached to
the abdomen. The nature of the umbilical attachment has never been
observed, except that as the sepia increases the white always becomes
less, and at last entirely disappears, like the yolk of the eggs of
birds.

5. The eyes are at first very large in these as in other animals, as in
the diagram. The ovum is seen at A, the eyes at B and C, and the embryo
sepia itself at D. The female contains ova during the spring. The ova
are produced in fifteen days; and when the ova are produced they remain
for fifteen days longer like the small seeds of grapes, and when these
are ruptured the young sepias escape from the inside. If a person
divides them before they have reached maturity, the young sepias emit
their fœces and vary in colour, and turn from white to red from alarm.

6. The crustaceans incubate upon their ova, which are placed beneath
them; but the polypus and sepia and such like incubate upon their ova
wherever they may be deposited, and especially the sepia, for the
female has often been observed with her abdomen upon the ground, but
the female polypus has been observed sometimes placed upon her ova,
and sometimes upon her mouth, holding with her tentacula over the hole
in which the ova were deposited. The sepia deposits her ova upon the
ground among fuci and reeds, or upon any thing thrown in the water,
as wood, branches, or stones; and the fishermen are careful to place
branches of trees in the water. Upon these they deposit their long and
united ova like branches of fruit.

7. The ova are deposited and produced by repeated exertion, as if the
parturition were accompanied with pain. The teuthis oviposits in the
sea. The ova, like those of the sepia, are united together. Both the
teuthus and sepia are short-lived, for very few of them survive a year.
The same is the case with the polypus. Each egg produces one small
sepia, and so also in the teuthis. The male teuthus differs from the
female; for if the hair (branchia) are drawn aside, the female will be
seen to have two red substances like mammæ, which the male does not
possess. The sepia also has the same sexual distinction, and is more
variegated than the female, as I observed before.


CHAPTER XVII.

1. It has already been observed that the male insects are less than
the female, and that the male mounts upon the female; and the manner
of their sexual intercourse has been described, and the difficulty
of separating them. Most of them produce their young very soon after
sexual intercourse. All the kinds except some psychæ (butterflies and
moths) produce worms. These produce a hard substance, like the seed
of the cnecus,[168] which is fluid within. From the worm an animal is
produced, but not from a portion of it, as if it were an ovum, but the
whole grows and becomes an articulated animal.

[168] Cantharus tinctorius, a plant of the thistle kind. L. and S.

2. Some of them are produced from similar animals, as phalangia and
spiders from phalangia and spiders, and attelabi,[169] locusts, and
grasshoppers. Others do not originate in animals of the same species,
but their production is spontaneous, for some of them spring from the
dew which falls upon plants. The origin of these is naturally in the
spring, though they often appear in the winter, if fine weather and
south winds occur for any length of time. Some originate in rotten mud
and dung; and others in the fresh wood of plants or in dry wood; others
among the hair of animals, or in their flesh, or excrements, whether
ejected, or still existing in the body, as those which are called
helminthes.

[169] The larva of some species.

3. There are three kinds of these, the flat worms, the round worms,
and those which are called ascarides. From these creatures nothing
is produced; but the broad worm is attached to the intestine, and
produces something like the seed of the colocynth, and this is used by
physicians as a proof of the presence of the worm.

4. Butterflies are produced from caterpillars; and these originate
in the leaves of green plants, especially the rhaphahus, which
some persons call crambe. At first they are smaller than millet,
afterwards they grow into little worms, in three days they become
small caterpillars, afterwards they grow and become motionless, and
change their form. In this state the creature is called chrysalis. It
has a hard covering, but moves when it is touched. They are united to
something by weblike processes, and have no mouth nor any other visible
organ. After a short time the covering is burst, and a winged animal
escapes, which is called a butterfly.

5. At first, while in the caterpillar state, they take food and
evacuate fœces, but in the chrysalis state they do neither. The same is
the case with all other creatures which originate in worms, and those
which produce worms after sexual intercourse, or even without this
process; for the offspring of bees, anthrenæ, and wasps, while they are
young worms, consume food and evacuate excrement, but when from worms
they receive their conformation they are called nymphæ, and neither
feed nor evacuate, but remain quiet in their covering until they are
grown. They then make their escape by cutting through a place where the
cell is fastened on.

6. The penia[170] and hypera[171] also are produced from a kind of
campe (caterpillar) which make a wave as they walk, and as they
advance bend the hinder extremity up to that which has preceded. The
creature produced always derives its colour from the campe in which
it originates. A certain great worm, which has as it were horns, and
differs from others, at its first metamorphosis produces a campe,
afterwards a bombylius, and lastly a necydalus. It passes through all
these forms in six months. From this animal some women unroll and
separate the bombycina (cocoons), and afterwards weave them. It is
said that this was first woven in the island of Cos by Pamphila, the
daughter of Plateos.

[170] Some species of larva.

[171] Geometra.

7. From the worms in dry wood the insects called carabi are produced in
the same manner; for at first they are immoveable worms, and afterwards
the carabi are produced by the rupture of their case. The crambides
originate in the plant called crambe, and these also have wings, and
the prasocurides from the plant called prasum (onion). The œstri are
produced from the little flat creatures that are found on the surface
of rivers. Wherefore also they congregate in the greatest numbers
around the waters where such animals are found. The kind of pygolampis
which has no wings originates in a small, black, hairy caterpillar.
These undergo another change, and turn into the winged creatures called
bostrychi.

8. The empides originate in ascarides, and the ascarides originate in
the mud of wells and running waters which flow over an earthy bottom.
At first the decaying mud acquires a white colour, which afterwards
becomes black, and finally red. When this takes place, very small red
creatures are seen growing in it like fuci. At first these move about
in a mass, afterwards their connection is ruptured, the creatures
called ascarides are borne about in the water, after a few days they
stand erect in the water without motion and of a hard texture, and
subsequently the case is broken and the empis sits upon it until either
the sun or the wind enables it to move, then it flies away.

9. The commencement of life in all other worms, and in all creatures
produced from worms, originates in the influence of the sun and wind.
The ascarides are produced in greater numbers, and more quickly, where
the various matters are mixed together, as in the works conducted in
the Megarian territory, for putrefaction thus takes place more readily.
The autumnal season also is favourable to their increase, for there is
less moisture at that time of the year. The crotones[172] originate in
the agrostis, the melolonthæ from the worms which originate in the dung
of oxen and asses.

[172] Ticks. Acarus ricinus.

10. The canthari which roll up dung, hide themselves in it during the
winter, and produce worms, which afterwards become canthari; and
from the worms which inhabit the osprea,[173] winged creatures, like
those already mentioned, derive their existence. Flies originate in
dung which has been set apart, and those who are employed in this work
strive to separate the remainder which is mixed together, for they say
that the dung is thus brought to putrefaction.

[173] Vetches, leguminous plants.

11. The origin of these worms is very small; for first of all a redness
is perceived, and motion commences, as if they were united together.
The worm then again becomes still, afterwards it moves, and then again
is immoveable. From this the worm is completed, and motion recommences
under the action of the sun and wind. The myops is produced in wood.
The orsodacnæ[174] from the metamorphosis of worms, which originate on
the stalks of the crambe. The cantharis from worms which dwell on the
fig tree, apium (pear tree), and pitch tree, for there are worms on all
these, and on the cynacantha.[175] They assemble round strong smelling
things because they originate from them.

[174] Chrysomela oleracea.

[175] Perhaps the dog rose, or sweet briar.

12. The conops springs from a worm which originates in the thick part
of vinegar; for there seem also to be worms in things which are the
farthest from putrefaction, as in snow which has laid for some time:
for after having laid, it becomes red, wherefore, also, the worms
are such and hairy. Those in the snow in Media are large and white,
and furnished with but little power of motion. In Cyprus, when the
manufacturers of the stone called chalcitis burn it for many days in
the fire, a winged creature, something larger than a great fly, is seen
walking and leaping in the fire.

13. The worms perish when they are taken out of the snow, and so do
these creatures when taken from the fire. And the salamander shews that
it is possible for some animal substances to exist in the fire, for
they say that fire is extinguished when this animal walks over it.

14. In the river Hypanis in the Cimmerian Bosphorus, about the summer
solstice, capsules larger than grape-seed are floated down the river:
when these are ruptured, a four-footed, winged creature makes its
escape, which lives and flies about till the evening. As the sun
descends, it becomes emaciated, and is dead by sunset, having lived
but one day; for which cause it is called ephemerum. Most animals which
spring from caterpillars or worms, are first of all enclosed in a web,
and this is their nature.

15. The wasps which are called ichneumons, which are smaller than the
others, kill the phalangia, and carry them to a wall, or some other
place with a hole in it; and when they have covered them over with mud,
they oviposit there, and the ichneumon wasps are produced from them.
Many of the coleoptera, and other small and anonymous creatures make
little holes in tombs or walls, and there deposit their worms.

16. The period of reproduction, from its commencement to its
conclusion, is generally completed in three or four weeks. In the worms
and worm-like creatures, three weeks are usually sufficient, and four
weeks are usually enough for those which are oviparous. In one week
from their sexual intercourse, the growth of the ovum is completed. In
the remaining three weeks, those that produce by generation, hatch and
bring forth their ova, as in the spiders, and such like creatures. The
metamorphoses generally occupy three or four days, like the crisis of
diseases. This is the mode of generation in insects.

17. They die from the shrivelling of their limbs, as large animals do
of old age. Those which are furnished with wings have these organs
drawn together in autumn. The myopes die from an effusion of water in
their eyes.


CHAPTER XVIII.

1. All persons are not agreed as to the generation of bees, for some
say that they neither produce young, nor have sexual intercourse; but
that they bring their young from other sources; and some say that they
collect them from the flowers of the calyntrus,[176] and others from
the flower of the calamus.[177] Others again, say that they are found
in the flowers of the olive, and produce this proof, that the swarms
are most abundant when the olives are fertile. Other persons affirm
that they collect the young of the drones from any of the substances we
have named, but that the rulers (queens) produce the young of the bees.

[176] Honeysuckle.

[177] Reed.

2. There are two kinds of rulers, the best of these is red, the other
black and variegated: their size is double that of the working bees;
the part of the body beneath the cincture is more than half of the
whole length: by some they are called the mother bees, as if they were
the parents of the rest; and they argue, that unless the ruler is
present, drones only are produced, and no bees. Others affirm that they
have sexual intercourse, and that the drones are males, and the bees
females.

3. The other bees originate in the cells of the comb, but the rulers
are produced in the lower part of the comb, six or seven of them
separated, opposite to the rest of the progeny. The bees have a sting,
which the drones have not: the kings and rulers have a sting which they
do not make use of, and some persons suppose that they have none.


CHAPTER XIX.

1. There are several kinds of bees, the best are small, round, and
variegated: another kind is large, like the anthrene: a third kind is
called phor; this is black, and has a broad abdomen: the drone is the
fourth, and is the largest of all; it has no sting, and is incapable of
work, for which reason people often wrap something round their hives,
so that the bees can enter, but the drones, being larger, cannot.

2. There are two kinds of rulers among bees, as I observed before. In
every hive there are several rulers, and not a single one, for the hive
perishes if there are not rulers enough (not that they thus become
anarchical, but, as they say, because they are required for breeding
the bees); if there are too many rulers they perish, for thus they
become distracted.

3. If the spring is late, and drought and rusts are about, the progeny
is small. When the weather is dry, they make honey. When it is damp,
their progeny multiplies; for which reason, the olives and the swarms
of bees multiply at the same time. They begin by making comb, in which
they place the progeny, which is deposited with their mouths, as those
say who affirm that they collect it from external sources. Afterwards
they gather the honey which is to be their food, during the summer and
the autumn; that which is gathered in the autumn is the best.

4. Wax is made from flowers. They bring the material of wax from the
droppings of trees, but the honey falls from the air, principally about
the rising of the stars, and when the rainbow rests upon the earth.
Generally no honey is produced before the rising of the Pleiades. We
argue that wax is made, as I said, from flowers, but that the bees do
not make honey, but simply collect that which falls; for those who keep
bees find the cells filled with honey in the course of one or two days.
In the autumn there are flowers enough, but the bees make no honey,
if that which they have produced is taken away. But if one supply was
taken away, and they were in want of food, they would make more if they
procured it from flowers.

5. The honey becomes thick by ripening, for at first it is like water,
and continues liquid for some days, wherefore it never becomes thick
if it is taken away during that time. It requires twenty days to make
it consistent; this is very plain from the taste of it, for it differs
both in sweetness and solidity. The bee carries honey from every plant
which has cup-shaped flowers, and from all those which contain a sweet
principle, but does not injure the fruit; it takes up and carries away
the sweet taste of plants with its tongue-like organ.

6. The honey-comb is pressed when the wild figs begin to appear; and
they produce the best grubs when they can produce honey. The bees carry
the wax and bee-bread upon their legs, but the honey is disgorged into
the cells. After the progeny is deposited in the cells, they incubate
like birds. In the wax cells the little worm is placed at the side;
afterwards it rises of itself to be fed. It is united to the comb in
such a manner as to be held by it. The progeny both of the bees and
drones from which the little worms are produced, is white. As they grow
they become bees and drones. The progeny of the king-bees is rather
red, and about the consistency of thick honey. In bulk it is as large
as the creature which is produced from it. The progeny of the king-bee
is not a worm, but comes forth a perfect bee, as they say; and, when
the progeny is produced in the comb, honey is found in that which is
opposite.

7. After the grub is covered up, it has wings and feet; and when it
has acquired wings, it bursts through the membrane, and flies away.
It evacuates an excrementitious matter while it is a worm, but not
afterwards, until it is perfected, as I observed before. If a person
cuts off the head of the grub before its wings are acquired, the other
bees devour it; if a person having cut off the wings of a drone lets it
go, the bees will eat off the wings of the other drones.

8. The bee will live for six years, some have lived for seven, and if a
swarm lasts nine or ten years, it is considered to have done well. In
Pontus there are very white bees, which make honey twice every month.
In Therniscyra, near the river Thermodon, are found bees which make
cells in the earth, and in hives with a very small quantity of wax, but
their honey is thick. The cells are smooth and homogeneous. They only
do this in the winter, and not all the year round; for there is a great
deal of ivy in the place, which flowers at this season of the year,
and from this they carry away the honey. From the higher regions of
Amisus a kind of white honey is procured, which the bees form upon the
trees without wax. The same is also found in another place in Pontus.
There are also bees which form triple cells in the earth; these form
honey, but never have grubs. All such as these, however, are not cells,
neither are they formed by every kind of bee.


CHAPTER XX.

1. The anthrenæ[178] and wasps form cells for their progeny when they
have no rulers, but are wandering about in search of them, the anthrenæ
upon some high place, the wasps in holes. But when they have the rulers
they form their cells underground. All their cells are hexagonal, like
those of bees; they are not formed of wax, but of a web-like membrane,
made of the bark of trees. The cells of the anthrenæ are far more
elegant than those of wasps. Upon the side of their cells they place
their progeny, in the manner of the bees, like a drop of liquid united
to the wall of the cell. The progeny in all the cells is not alike, but
in some they are so large as to be almost ready for flight, in others
are nymphæ, in others grubs.

[178] Hornet, Apis terrestris.

2. The only excrementitious matter is found in the cells of the
grubs, as in the case of bees. As long as they are nymphæ they remain
motionless, and the cell is sealed over, and on the other side of the
cell which contains their progeny, there is a drop of honey in the
combs of the anthrenæ. The grubs of these creatures are produced in the
autumn, not in the spring, but they evidently grow most rapidly at the
full moon. The progeny and the grubs are not united to the bottom, but
to the side of the cell.


CHAPTER XXI.

1. Some of the bombycia[179] form an angular cell of mud, which
they attach to a stone or something else, and smear with a kind of
transparent substance; this is so very thick and hard, that it can
scarcely be broken with the blow of a spear. In this they deposit their
ova, and the white maggots are contained in a black membrane; and wax
is formed in the mud without any membrane, this wax is much more yellow
than that of bees.

[179] Apis cementaria.

2. The ants also have sexual intercourse, and produce maggots which
they do not attach to anything. As these grow, they change from
small round things to long articulated beings. The season for their
production is in the spring.

3. The land-scorpions also bring forth many egg-like maggots, upon
which they incubate. When the young ones are perfect, they drive out
and destroy their parents like spiders, for they are frequently eleven
in number.


CHAPTER XXII.

1. The arachnia copulate in the manner already described, and produce
maggots which at first are small. After their metamorphosis they
become spiders, not from a part but from the whole of the maggot,
for they are round from the first. When the female has produced her
ova, she incubates upon them, in three days they acquire limbs. All
of them produce their young in a web, which is thin and small in some
species, but compact in others. Some are enclosed entirely in a round
receptacle, and others are only partially covered by the web. All
the young spiders are not produced at once, but as soon as they are
hatched they leap out and shoot forth a web. If they are bruised they
are found to contain a thick white fluid like that of maggots.

2. The field-spiders first of all deposit their ova in a web, of
which one half is attached to themselves, and the other external,
they incubate upon this, and produce their young alive. The phalangia
deposit their ova in a thick basket which they weave, upon this they
incubate. The smooth kinds produce a small number, the phalangia a
great many. When they are grown, they surround their parent in a
circle, kill and throw her out. They often seize the male in the same
way if they can catch him, for he assists the female in incubation.
Sometimes there are as many as three hundred round a single phalangium.
The little spiders become full-grown in about four weeks.


CHAPTER XXIII.

1. Locusts copulate in the same manner as all other insects, the
smaller mounting upon the larger, for the male is the smaller. They
oviposit by fixing the organ which is attached to their tail (the
ovipositor) in the ground. The males do not possess this organ. Many
of them deposit their ova in one spot, so as to make it appear like a
honey-comb. As soon as they have deposited their ova, egg-like maggots
are formed, which are covered with a thin coating of earth like a
membrane, and in this they are matured.

2. The young are so soft as to collapse if they are only touched. They
are not produced on the surface, but a little below the surface of
the soil; and as soon as they are matured, they escape from the coat
of soil in which they are enclosed as small black locusts. Their skin
is subsequently ruptured, and they then attain their full size. They
produce their young at the end of summer, and then die.

3. For as soon as they have deposited their ova, small worms make their
appearance on their necks, the males also perish at the same time: they
come out of the earth in the spring. Locusts never shew themselves in
mountainous countries, nor in poor land, but in plains, and broken
soil, for they deposit their ova in fissures. The ova remain in the
soil during the winter, and in the summer the locusts are produced from
the germs of the preceding year.

4. The young of the attelabi are produced in the same manner, and the
parents die after having deposited their ova. Their ova are destroyed
by the rains of the autumn, if the weather is wet; but if that season
is dry, many attelabi are produced, because they are not equally
destroyed; for their destruction appears to be irregular, and to take
place by accident.


CHAPTER XXIV.

1. There are two kinds of grasshoppers: some are small. These are the
first to appear, the last to perish. Others, which chirp, are large:
these appear last, and disappear first. There is another difference
between the small and large kind. Those which chirp have a division in
the middle of the body: those which do not chirp have none. The large
ones, which chirp, are called achetæ; the small are called tettigonia.
Such of these as are divided, sing a little.

2. Grasshoppers do not appear where there are no trees, for which
reason they are unknown in the open country of Cyrene, but are abundant
near the city, and especially among olive trees, for these do not give
much shade, and grasshoppers are not produced in the cold, nor in very
shady groves. Both the large and small ones have sexual intercourse
with their own kind, copulating with each other on their backs. The
male inserts his organ into the female, in the same manner as other
insects. The female has a divided pudendum. The female individual is
the one which receives the male.

3. They deposit their ova in fields, piercing the soil with the organ
at the extremity of their body, like the attelabi; for the attelabi
also oviposit in the fields, for which reason they are common in
Cyrene. They oviposit also in the reeds which are used to support
the vines; these they pierce: and so they do in the stems of the
scilla. The young ones are washed into the earth, and are common in
rainy weather. The maggot, when it is grown in the earth, becomes
a tettigometra: these are sweetest before they have ruptured their
covering.

4. And when the season arrives for their appearance, about the
solstice, they come forth by night, and immediately burst their
envelope, and the tettigometra becomes a grasshopper. They immediately
become black and hard, acquire their full size, and begin to chirp.
In both kinds the males chirp; the others, which do not chirp, are
females. When first produced the males are the sweetest: after the
sexual intercourse, the females are sweetest, for they contain white
ova.

5. If a noise is made as they fly along, they emit a fluid like water,
which the agriculturists describe as if they emitted both a liquid and
solid excrement, and that they feed on dew; and if any one approaches
them with a bent finger, which is gradually straightened, they will
remain more quiet than if it is put out straight at once, and will
climb up upon the finger; for, from the dimness of their sight, they
climb upon it as if it were a moving leaf.


CHAPTER XXV.

1. Those insects which are not carnivorous, but live upon the juices
of living flesh, as lice, fleas, and bugs, produce nits from sexual
intercourse; from these nits nothing else is formed. Of these insects
the fleas originate in very small portions of corrupted matter, for
they are always collected together where there is any dry dung.
Bugs[180] proceed from the moisture which collects on the bodies of
animals: lice from the flesh of other creatures; for before they
appear, they exist in little pimples which do not contain matter: and
if these are pricked, the lice[181] escape from them. Some persons have
been afflicted with a disease arising from excessive moisture in the
body, of which people have died, as they say that Alcmon the poet, and
Pherecydes of Syria did.

[180] Cinex lectularius.

[181] Perhaps Acarus Scabiei, Itch insect.

2. And in some diseases lice are very common. There is a kind of lice,
which they call wild, and are harder than the common sort, which are
difficult to eradicate from the body. The heads of children are most
subject to be infested with lice, and men the least so, for women are
more liable to them than men. Those that have lice in the head are
less subject to headache. Many other animals are infested with lice:
for both birds have them, and those which are called phasiani, unless
they dust themselves, are destroyed by them. And so are all those
creatures which have feathers with a hollow stem, and those which have
hair, except the ass, which has neither lice nor ticks. Oxen have both;
sheep and goats have ticks, but no lice; hogs are infested with large,
hard lice, and dogs with those which are called cynoraïstæ. All lice
originate in the animals that are infested with them. All creatures
that have lice, and wash themselves, are more liable to them when they
change the water in which they bathe.

3. In the sea is a kind of lice[182] growing on fish; but these do
not originate in the fish, but in the mud. Their appearance is that
of wood-lice with many feet, except that they have a wide tail. There
is one species of marine lice which occur everywhere, and especially
infest the trigla. All these creatures are furnished with many legs,
are exsanguineous, and insects. The œstrus[183] of the thynnus occurs
near the fins: in shape it is like a scorpion, and as large as a
spider. In the sea between Cyrene and Egypt, there is a fish called the
phtheira, which accompanies the dolphin; it is the fattest of all fish,
because it enjoys an abundance of the food which the dolphin hunts for.

[182] Perhaps Oniscus Ceti, or Isora.

[183] Perhaps Lernœa branchialis.


CHAPTER XXVI.

1. There are also other minute animals, as I observed before, some of
which occur in wool,[184] and in woollen goods; as the moths, which
are produced in the greatest abundance when the wool is dusty, and
especially if a spider is enclosed with them, for this creature is
thirsty, and dries up any fluid which may be present. This worm also
occurs in garments. There is one which occurs in old honeycombs, like
the creature which inhabits dry wood: this appears to be the least of
all creatures, it is called acari, it is white and small. Others also
are found in books,[185] some of which are like those which occur in
garments: others are like scorpions;[186] they have no tails, and are
very small. And on the whole, they occur in everything, so to say,
which from being dry, becomes moist, or being moist, becomes dry, if it
has any life in it.

[184] Tinea pellionella, or T. sarcitella.

[185] Dumestes Pellio, and D. lardarius.

[186] Phalangium cancroides.

2. There is a little worm which is called xylophthorus,[187] which
is no less extraordinary than these animals; for its variegated head
is projected beyond its case, and its feet are at the extremity, as
in other worms. The rest of the body is contained in a case made of
a substance like spider's web, and a dry material on the outside of
this; so that it appears to walk about with this attached to it. These
creatures are attached to their case, and as a snail to its shell, so
the whole of the case is joined to the worm, and it does not fall out
of it, but is drawn out of it, as if they were joined together. If a
person pulls off the case, the creature dies, and becomes as helpless
as a snail without its shell. As time advances, this grub becomes a
chrysalis, like a caterpillar, and lies without motion: but the nature
of the winged creature that is produced has never been ascertained.

[187] Tinea graminella, Tinea lichenella, Tinea Xylophorus, or perhaps
larva of Phryganea.

3. The wild figs upon the fig-trees contain a creature called
psen;[188] this is at first a little worm, and afterwards having
ruptured the case, the psen flies out, and leaves it behind. It then
pierces the unripe figs, and causes them not to fall off, wherefore
gardeners place wild fruit near the cultivated kinds, and plant the
wild and cultivated plants near each other.

[188] Cynips Psenes.


CHAPTER XXVII.

1. The sexual intercourse of sanguineous and oviparous quadrupeds takes
place in the spring. They do not, however, all copulate at the same
season; but some in the spring, others in the summer or autumn, as the
season is appropriate for bringing up the young of each species. The
tortoise produces hard, two-coloured eggs, like those of birds. Having
deposited her eggs, she buries them, and makes a beaten place above
them. When this is done, she sits upon them. The eggs are hatched the
following year. The emys goes out of the water to deposit her eggs, and
digs a hole like a cask, in which she places her eggs and leaves them.
Having left them alone for less than thirty days, she digs them up
again and hatches them and leads them at once to the water. The marine
turtles deposit their eggs in the earth like domestic birds, and cover
them up with earth and sit upon them during the night. They produce a
great many eggs, as many as an hundred.

2. The saurians and both the land and river crocodiles produce their
eggs upon the land. Those of the lizards are hatched spontaneously in
the earth; for the lizard does not live a whole year, for it is said
to live only six months. The river crocodile produces as many as sixty
eggs, which are white. She sits upon them for sixty days, for they live
a long while. A very large animal is produced from these small eggs;
for the egg is not larger than that of a goose, and the young is in
proportion, but when full grown the creature measures seventeen cubits.
Some persons say that it grows as long as it lives.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Among serpents the viper is externally viviparous, but first of all
internally oviparous. The ovum, like that of fish, is of one colour and
soft skinned. The young are produced in the upper part. They are not
enclosed in a shelly covering, neither are the ova of fish. The little
vipers are produced in a membrane, which they rupture on the third
day, and sometimes they make their escape by eating their way through
the mother. They are produced one by one in the course of a day, and
their number often exceeds twenty. Other serpents are externally
oviparous, but their ova are joined together like women's necklaces.
When the female deposits her eggs in the soil, she incubates upon them.
These also are hatched in the second year. This is the manner of the
production of serpents, insects, and of oviparous quadrupeds.




BOOK THE SIXTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. The above describes the manner of reproduction in serpents, insects,
and oviparous quadrupeds. All birds are oviparous, but the season of
sexual intercourse and of bringing out their young is not the same in
all; for some copulate and produce eggs at all seasons, as we may say,
as the domestic fowl and the pigeon, for the domestic fowl lays eggs
all the year round, except two months at the winter solstice. Some of
the finest birds will lay sixty eggs before they want to sit, though
these are not so fruitful as the more common kinds. The Adrianic fowls
are very small, but they lay every day; but they are cruel, and often
kill their chickens. Their colour is variegated. Some of the domestic
birds lay twice a-day, and some have been known to lay so many eggs
that they died very soon.

2. The domestic fowls, as I said, lay continually; but the pigeon,
dove, trygon, and œnas lay twice a-year; and the pigeon ten times. The
greatest number of birds lay in the spring; and some of them produce
many young, and this in two ways; some producing their young often, as
the pigeon; others producing many at a time, as the domestic fowl. All
birds with crooked claws, except the cenchris,[189] lay but few eggs.
This bird lays the most of any of its class; for it has been observed
to produce four, and it even produces more. Some birds lay their eggs
in nests; but those that do not fly, as partridges and quails, do not
make nests, but lay their eggs on the ground and cover them over with
rubbish. The lark and tetrix[190] do the same.

[189] Falco tinnunculus.

[190] Tetrao tetrix or Otis tetrix.

3. These birds make their nests in a place sheltered from the wind.
That which the Beotians call ærops[191] is the only bird that makes
its nests in caverns in the earth. The cichlæ[192] make nests of mud
like swallows in the tops of trees; but they place them in order close
to each other, so that from their proximity they look like a chain of
nests. Among the birds which make solitary nests, the hoopoe makes no
real nest, but lays its eggs in the stumps of hollow trees, without
building at all. The coccyx[193] lays its eggs in houses and holes in
rocks. The tetrix, which the Athenians call "urax," makes no nest on
the ground or in trees, but in herbaceous plants.

[191] Merops apiaster.

[192] Turdus, thrush.

[193] Cuculus canorus.


CHAPTER II.

1. The eggs of all birds are alike and have a hard shell, if they are
produced by sexual intercourse and are not decayed, for domestic fowls
sometimes lay soft eggs. Birds' eggs are two-coloured, externally
white, internally yellow. The eggs of birds inhabiting the sides of
streams and lakes differ from those living on dry land, for in the eggs
of aquatic birds the yolk bears a much larger proportion to the white.

2. The colours of eggs vary in different kinds of birds. Some have
white eggs, as pigeons, partridges; some yellow, as those inhabiting
streams; others are spotted, as those of the meleagris[194] and
phasianus;[195] the eggs of the cenchris are red like vermilion. In the
egg itself there is a difference; for one end is pointed, the other
round. The round end is produced first. The large, sharp eggs are
males; those which are round and circular at the sharp end are females.

[194] Numida Meleagris.

[195] Phasianus colchicus.

3. They are matured by incubation. Some are hatched spontaneously in
the earth, as in Egypt, being buried in dung; and they say that in
Syracuse a drunkard placed eggs beneath his mat, and drank without
ceasing until the eggs were hatched; and eggs placed in warm vessels
have been matured and hatched spontaneously.

4. The seminal fluid of all birds is white, like that of other animals;
and when they copulate the female receives the male semen near the
diaphragm. The egg at first appears small and white, afterwards red
and bloody; as it grows it becomes quite ochreous and yellow; when it
becomes larger a distinction is made, and the internal part becomes
yellow, the external white; and when it is perfected it is set at
liberty, and excluded just at the period when it is changing from soft
to hard. So that during exclusion it is not hardened; but as soon as
it is excluded it thickens and becomes hard, unless it is diseased. And
eggs have been known to be excluded in the state in which all eggs are
at a certain period of their growth; for they were entirely yellow,
as the young bird is afterwards. Such have also been observed in the
domestic fowl beneath the diaphragm, where the eggs of the hen are
placed, entirely yellow, and as large as eggs usually are. This has
been considered ominous.

5. They are mistaken who say that the hypenemia (barren eggs) are the
remains of former acts of sexual intercourse; for young birds, as fowls
and geese, have been frequently observed to lay such eggs without any
sexual intercourse. Barren eggs are smaller, not so sweet, and more
fluid than fertile eggs, and they are more numerous. If they are placed
under a bird, the fluid part never thickens, but both the yolk and
the white remain in their original state. Many birds produce these
eggs, as the domestic fowl, partridge, pigeon, peafowl, goose, and
chenalopex.[196]

[196] Œnas tadorna.

6. Eggs are hatched more readily in summer than in winter; for in the
summer the domestic fowl will hatch in eighteen days, but in winter
sometimes in not less than twenty-five days. Some birds also are more
adapted for incubation than others. A thunder-storm during the season
of incubation will destroy the eggs. What are called cynosura and
uria (addled eggs) are more frequently produced in the summer. The
hypenemia[197] are by some persons called zephyria, because they say
that birds receive these winds in the spring. They do the same thing if
they are touched with the hand. The hypenemia become fertile; and eggs
that are produced by sexual intercourse are changed to another kind,
if the hen which contains either hypenemia or fertile eggs has sexual
intercourse with another bird before the eggs begin to change from
yellow to white, and the hypenemia become fertile, and the fertile eggs
produce birds of the nature of the second male.

[197] Eggs formed without sexual intercourse.

7. But if the change from yellow to white has already taken place,
neither the barren nor the fertile eggs are altered, so as to change to
the nature of the second male. And if the sexual intercourse should be
discontinued while the eggs are small, those which existed previously
undergo no change, but if the act is repeated, a rapid increase in
size takes place. The nature of the white and yolk of the egg is
different, not only in colour, but in other properties, for the yolk
coagulates with cold, while the white remains fluid, but the white
coagulates with heat, which the yolk does not, but remains soft, if it
is not burnt; and it becomes consistent and dry by boiling rather than
roasting.

8. The white and yolk are separated from each other by a membrane.
The chalazæ at the extremities of the yolk have nothing to do with
generation, as some persons suppose. These spots are two, one below
and one above. If many whites and yolks of eggs are taken out, and
mixed together in a vessel, and cooked with a slow and moderate heat,
the yolks will all collect in the middle, and the whites will surround
them. Young domestic fowls begin to lay eggs at the beginning of the
spring; they lay more than those which are older, but those of the
young birds are smaller, and if birds are not permitted to incubate,
they are destroyed and become sick.

9. After copulation birds ruffle and shake themselves, and often cover
themselves with chaff, and this also they do when they have laid.
Pigeons draw up their tail, geese go and bathe. The pregnancy and
conception of barren eggs is quick in most birds, as in the partridge,
on account of the violence of their sexual desires; for if the hen
stands in the way of the breath of the male, she conceives, and
immediately becomes of no use for fowling; for the partridge appears to
have a very distinct smell. The production of the egg after copulation,
and the production of the young by incubation, do not occupy the same
length of time in all birds, but varies according to their size.
The egg of the domestic fowl is perfected in ten days after sexual
intercourse, and that of the pigeon in a shorter time. Pigeons are
able to retain their eggs even in the act of parturition. If they are
disturbed by anything occurring in the neighbourhood of their nest,
or a feather be plucked out, or if anything else troubles or disturbs
them, they retain the egg they were about to lay.

10. This is peculiar to pigeons, and so is the following: for they
kiss each other when the male is about to mount, or else they will not
endure it. The older bird first gives a kiss, but afterwards he mounts
without kissing, but younger birds always kiss before copulation.
This also is peculiar to these birds. The females kiss and mount upon
each other like the males, when there is no male present. They do not
project anything into each other, but produce more eggs than those
which produce fertile ones; from these eggs nothing is hatched, but
they are all barren.


CHAPTER III.

1. The production of the bird from the egg is alike in them all, but
the period of completion varies, as I observed before. In domestic
fowls the first sign of alteration takes place after three days and
nights. This period is longer in larger birds, and shorter in small
birds. During this period the upper part of the yolk advances to the
small extremity of the egg, which is the beginning of the egg. This is
the part from which the chicken is excluded, and the heart is visible
like a red spot in the white of the egg.

2. This spot palpitates and moves as though it were endued with life.
From this, as it increases, two involved sanguineous passages like
veins lead to each of the surrounding tunics; and a membrane which has
sanguineous passages encloses the white at this period, and separates
it from the venous passages. A short time afterwards the body is
distinguished, at first very small and white, but the head is distinct,
and in this the eyes are the most enlarged. And this continues for some
time, for afterwards the eyes are reduced in size and approach each
other, but the lower part of the body has not at first any proportion
to the upper part.

3. One of the passages from the heart extends into a circle around the
embryo, and the other to the yolk, as if it were an umbilical cord.
The origin of the young bird is in the white, its nutriment is derived
from the yolk through the umbilical cord. On the tenth day, the whole
of the young bird and all its parts are distinct, but its head is still
larger than the rest of the body, and the eyes are larger than the rest
of the head. They have no sense of sight. If the eyes are taken out at
this period, they are larger than beans, and black; when the skin is
taken from them, they are seen to contain a white and cold fluid, very
brilliant in appearance, but without any hard substance. This is the
manner of the development of the eyes and head.

4. At the same period the viscera are visible, but the stomach, and
intestines, and the veins from the heart still appear to extend towards
the navel. From the navel a vein appears to extend upon the membrane
which encloses the yolk, and the yolk itself is at this period fluid,
and more abundant than in its natural state. The other extends to the
membrane which encloses the whole membrane containing the embryo, and
the membrane of the yolk and the fluid between them, and when the young
birds have grown a little more, part of the yolk goes to one end, and
part to the other, and between them is the fluid white; but the white
is still below the lower part of the yolk, where it was at first, but
at the tenth day the white disappears, for it has become small, viscid,
thick, and rather yellow.

5. This is the position of all the parts: the first and last part
adjoining the shell is the membrane of the egg, not the membrane of
the shell, but beneath this. This contains the fluid white; within
this is the young bird, and a membrane surrounding it, and separating
it from the fluid; beneath the embryo is the yolk, to which one of the
veins extends, and the other to the white which encloses it. A membrane
containing a fluid resembling sanies encloses the whole, and then
another membrane which surrounds the embryo itself, as I observed, and
separates it from the fluid. Below this the yolk, enclosed in another
membrane, which is reached by the umbilical cord from the heart, and
the great vein, so that the embryo does not appear to be in either of
the fluids.

6. About the twentieth day, if the hatching has been delayed beyond
this period, the young bird is able to chirp when moved externally, and
if the shell is taken off, by this time also it is downy. The head is
placed over the right leg upon the side, and the wing is over the head.
At this period the chorion-like membrane is visible, which is united
with the lowest membrane of the shell, to which one of the umbilical
cords passes, and the young bird is complete. The other chorion-like
membrane is also visible, enclosing the yolk. To this the other
umbilical cord extends. Both of these cords are attached to the heart
and the great vein. At the same period the cord which is attached to
one chorion falls off, and is separated from the animal, but the one
which passes to the yolk remains suspended from the young bird by a
thin bowel, and a considerable portion of the yolk is contained in the
young bird, and some of it is found in the stomach.

7. At this period also they eject an excrementitious matter into
the external chorion, and contain it in the stomach. The external
excrement is white, the internal yellow. At last the yolk, which has
been continually wasting and advancing, is entirely taken up and
enclosed in the young bird. So that portions of it may be observed in
the intestines of birds if they are dissected on the tenth day after
exclusion from the egg. But it is set at liberty from the navel, nor
does any communication remain, but the whole is separated. About the
before-mentioned period the young bird sleeps, but it stirs itself, and
looks up, and chirps when it is touched, and the heart swells up with
the navel, as if the embryo were breathing. This is the manner of the
development of the chick in the egg.

8. Birds also produce some barren eggs, as well as those from sexual
intercourse, but they produce nothing after incubation. This is
particularly observed in pigeons. Double eggs have two yolks; in some a
thin division of white prevents the yolks from mixing together; others
have not this division, but touch each other. There are some hens which
always lay double eggs, and in these the peculiarities of the yolks
have been observed; for a certain bird having laid eighteen eggs,
hatched two chickens from each of them, except those that were addled;
all the rest were productive, except that one of the twin chickens was
large and the other small in each. The last, however, was monstrous.


CHAPTER IV.

1. All the pigeon tribe, as the phatta and trygon, generally produce
two eggs; the trygon and the phatta are those which generally lay
three. The pigeon lays, as I said, at every season; the trygon and
the phatta in the spring, and not more than twice. The second brood
are hatched when the first has been destroyed, for many birds destroy
them. It sometimes lays three, as I have said, but it never brings out
more than two young ones, and sometimes only one, the remaining egg
is always addled. Very few birds begin to lay before they are a year
old; but when they have once begun to lay, they all, as we may say,
naturally contain eggs to the end of their life, though it is not easy
to see them in some birds, from their small size.

2. The pigeon usually produces one male and one female, and of these
the male is often hatched first; and having laid an egg one day, she
omits many days and then lays another. The male sits during a portion
of the day, and the female during the night. The first young one is
hatched and able to fly within twenty days, and the egg is billed on
the day before it is hatched; both the old birds keep the young ones
warm for some time, as they do the eggs. During the time of bringing up
their young the female is fiercer than the male: this is also the case
in other animals. They produce young ten times in a year, and sometimes
eleven times; those in Egypt even twelve times. The cock and hen birds
copulate within the year, for they do this at the end of six months.

3. And some say that the phatta and trygon are matured when three
months old, and they consider their great numbers as a proof of this.
The female contains her eggs fourteen days, and then sits upon them
fourteen more; in fourteen days after this the young ones fly so well
that it is difficult to catch them. The phatta lives, as they say,
forty years; the partridge more than sixteen years. The pigeon, after
having brought out her young, lays again in thirty days.


CHAPTER V.

1. The vulture builds its nest in inaccessible rocks, wherefore its
nest and young ones are rarely seen. For this reason Herodorus, the
father of Bryson the sophist, says that vultures come from another part
of the earth, which is invisible to us, giving as a reason for his
opinion, that they are seen in great numbers suddenly following the
path of an army. But difficult as it is to observe them, their nests
have been seen. The vulture produces two eggs. No other carnivorous
bird has been observed to produce young more than once a year; but
the swallow more frequently produces young twice a year than the
carnivorous birds. If a person pierces the eyes of young swallows they
recover, and are able to see afterwards.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The eagle produces three eggs, of which two only are hatched. This
is also related in the poems of Musæus. The bird which lays three eggs,
hatches two, and brings up but one. This frequently happens; but three
young have been seen in the nest. When the young begin to grow, one of
them is turned out by the parent, because she dislikes the trouble of
feeding it. At this period it is said to be without food, so that it
does not capture the young of wild creatures, for a few days the talons
are turned back, and the feathers become white, so that it then becomes
cruel to its young. The phene[198] receives and brings up the ejected
young one.

[198] Vultur cinereus, ossifragus, osprey.

2. The eagle incubates for thirty days; this is the usual period of
incubation for large birds, as the goose and the bustard. Moderately
sized birds usually sit twenty days, as the ictinus[199] and
hierax.[200] The ictinus usually produces two young ones, and sometimes
three; the Ætolian kite, as it is called, sometimes produces four. The
raven produces not only two, but, as they say, many eggs, which she
sits upon for about twenty days. She also turns out some of her young
ones. Many other birds do the same thing; and generally those which
produce several turn out one.

[199] Kite.

[200] Hawk.

3. All kinds of eagles do not behave in the same way to their young;
but the pygargus is cruel; and the black eagles are careful for the
food of their young; but all birds with crooked talons as soon as their
young can fly well beat them and drive them from the nest. And most
birds of other classes, as I have before observed, do the same thing;
and when they have brought them up, they take no more notice of them,
except the crow. This bird cares for its young a long while, for as it
flies past them it gives them food after they are able to fly.


CHAPTER VII.

1. The cuckoo is said by some persons to be a changed hawk, because the
hawk which it resembles disappears when the cuckoo comes, and indeed
very few hawks of any sort can be seen during the period in which the
cuckoo is singing except for a few days. The cuckoo is seen for a
short time in the summer, and disappears in winter. But the hawk has
crooked talons, which the cuckoo has not, nor does it resemble the hawk
in the form of its head, but in both these respects is more like the
pigeon than the hawk, which it resembles in nothing but its colour; the
markings, however, upon the hawk are like lines, while the cuckoo is
spotted.

2. Its size and manner of flight is like that of the smallest kind of
hawk, which generally disappears during the season in which the cuckoo
is seen. But they have both been seen at the same time, and the cuckoo
was being devoured by the hawk, though this is never done by birds of
the same kind. They say that no one has ever seen the young of the
cuckoo. It does, however, lay eggs, but it makes no nest; but sometimes
it lays its eggs in the nests of small birds, and devours their eggs,
especially in the nests of the pigeon, when it has eaten their eggs.
Sometimes it lays two, but usually only one egg; it lays also in the
nest of the hypolais,[201] which hatches and brings it up. At this
season it is particularly fat and sweet-fleshed; the flesh also of
young hawks is very sweet and fat. There is also a kind of them which
builds a nest in precipitous cliffs.

[201] Sylvia curucca, hedge sparrow.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. In many birds the male alternates with the female in the duty of
incubation, as we observed in speaking of pigeons, and takes her place
while she is obliged to procure food for herself. In geese the female
alone sits upon the eggs, and having once begun, she never leaves them
during the whole process of incubation. The nests of all water birds
are situated in marshy and grassy places, by which means they can keep
quiet and still have food within their reach, so that they do not
starve all the while. The females alone, among the crows, sit on the
eggs, which they never leave; but the males bring them food and feed
them.

2. The females of the pigeons begin to sit at twilight, and remain on
the nest the whole night, till dawn; and the male the rest of the time.
Partridges make two nests of eggs, upon one of which the male sits, on
the other the female; and each of them hatches and brings up its own:
and the male has sexual intercourse with its young as soon as they are
hatched.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The peacock lives about twenty-five years, and produces young
generally at three years old; by which time also they have obtained
their variegated plumage: and it hatches in thirty days, or rather
more. It only produces young once a-year, laying twelve eggs, or not
quite so many. It lays its eggs at intervals of two or three days,
and not regularly. At first they lay only eight. The pea-fowl also
lays barren eggs: they copulate in the spring, and lay their eggs
immediately afterwards.

2. This bird sheds its feathers when the leaves of the trees begin
to fall, and begins to acquire them again with the first budding in
the spring. Those who rear these birds place the eggs for incubation
beneath domestic fowls; because the peacock flies at, and torments the
hen when she is sitting; for which reason some of the wild birds make
their escape from the males before they begin to lay and sit. They
place only two eggs under domestic fowls, for these are all that they
can hatch and bring out; and they take care to put food before them,
that they may not get up and desert their incubation.

3. Birds at the season of sexual intercourse have large testicles. In
the more lascivious they are always more evident, as the domestic cock
and the partridge. In those that are not always lascivious, they are
less. This is the manner of the gestation and reproduction of birds.


CHAPTER X.

1. It has been already observed that fish are not always oviparous,
for the selache are always viviparous. All the rest are oviparous. The
selache are viviparous, having first of all produced ova internally;
and these they bring up in themselves, except the batrachus. Fish
have also, as I observed before, very different uteri in different
kinds: for in the oviparous genera the uterus is double, and situated
low down. In the selache the uterus is more like that of birds. There
is this difference, however, that the ova are not placed near the
diaphragm, but in an intermediate position near the spine; and when
they have grown they change their place from this part. The ovum in
all fish is not of two, but of one colour; and it is more white than
yellow, both in its early stages, and after the formation of the embryo.

2. The development of the ovum is different in fish and in birds, in
that it has not the umbilical cord which passes to the membrane of the
shell; but only the passage which leads to the yolk in the eggs of
birds. The rest of the development of the ovum is alike in birds and
fish; for it takes place at the extremity, and the veins have their
origin in a similar manner in the heart; and the head, and eyes, and
upper parts of the body are larger than the rest. As the young fish
increases, the ovum continues to diminish, and at last it disappears,
and is absorbed, like the yolk in the eggs of birds. The umbilical cord
is attached a little below the abdomen. At first the cord is long, but
it becomes less as the fish grows, and at last is small, and finally
absorbed, like that of birds.

3. The embryo and the ovum are enclosed in a common membrane, and
beneath this there is another membrane, in which the embryo alone is
enclosed. Between these membranes there is a fluid substance. The
nutriment contained in the stomach of the young fish is similar to
that in the young birds, partly white, and partly yellow. The form of
the uterus must be learned from dissection. This organ is different
in different fish, as in the galeode by themselves, and the flat fish
by themselves: for in some the ova are attached near the spine to the
centre of the uterus, as I observed before, as in scylia.[202] They
descend when they begin to increase, when the uterus is double, and are
attached to the diaphragm, as in other fish: the ova descend into each
division.

[202] Dog-fish. Squalus stellaris.

4. The uterus of these fish, and of the other galeode, has a small
appendage attached to the diaphragm like a white nipple, which is not
present unless they are pregnant. The scylia and the batis have a
shell-like substance, which contains the fluid of the ovum. In form the
shell resembles the tongue of a wind instrument, and hair-like passages
are attached to the shells. The young of the scylia, which some persons
call nebria galei, are born when the shell falls off and bursts. The
young of the batis when they are brought forth are excluded by the
rupture of the shell. In the acantheas[203] galeos the ova are attached
to the diaphragm above the nipples; and when the ovum descends, the
young is attached to it after it is set free. The reproduction of the
alopex is in the same manner.

[203] Squalus Acanthias.

5. Most galei which are called smooth have the ova placed between the
divisions of the uterus, like those of the scylia; and as they surround
it, they descend into each division of the uterus, and they are
produced, attached to the uterus by an umbilical cord; so that when the
ova are taken out, they appear similar to the embryo of quadrupeds. And
the long umbilical cord is attached to the lower part of the uterus,
each part, as it were, attached to an acetabulum; and to the middle of
the embryo near the liver. And when it is dissected, the food is like
an egg, though the ovum be no longer there. There is a chorion, and
peculiar membranes surrounding each of the embryos, as in quadrupeds.

6. The head of the embryo when it is just produced, is upwards; but as
it grows and reaches maturity, it is placed downwards. The males are
placed on the left, and the females on the right, or there are males
and females together on the same side. The embryo, when dissected,
resembles that of quadrupeds, in having its viscera such as it has, as
the liver, large, and full of blood. In all the selache the ova are
placed high up, near the diaphragm; many larger, and many smaller: and
the embryos are placed below, wherefore it is probable that such fish
produce their young, and copulate frequently during the same month, for
they do not produce all their young at once, but frequently, and for
a long while; but those that are in the lower part of the uterus are
matured and brought to perfection.

7. The other galei both emit and receive their young into themselves,
and so do the rhine and the narca; and a large narca has been observed
to contain eighty young in herself. The acanthias is the only one of
the galei which does not admit its young into itself, on account of
their thorns. Among the flat fish the trygon and batos do not admit
their young, on account of the roughness of the tail. Neither does
the batrachus admit its young, on account of the size of their heads,
and their thorns; and this is the only one that is not viviparous, as
I previously observed. These are their mutual differences, and the
manner of the development of their ova.

8. At the season of sexual intercourse, the seminal ducts of the
male are full of fluid, so that a white matter escapes when they are
pressed. These passages are divided, and originate in the diaphragm
and the large vein: at the same season the passages of the male are
conspicuous, and may be compared with the uterus of the female. When
it is not the season of sexual intercourse, they are less conspicuous,
from not being in use. In some fish, and sometimes, they are not
visible at all, as it was remarked of the testicles of birds. The
seminal and uterine passages are different in other respects also,
and because those of the male are attached to the loins, those of the
female are easily moved, and enclosed in a thin membrane. The nature of
the passages of the male may be seen in works on anatomy.

9. The selachea become pregnant again while with young, and the period
of gestation is six months. Among the galei, the asterias produces
young the oftenest; for it produces twice in a month: it begins to
copulate in the month of September. All the other galei except the
scylia produce twice in the year; the scylia but once. Some of them
have their young in the spring. The rhine produces its first brood in
the spring, and its last in the autumn, near the winter season, and
the setting of the Pleiades. The second fry are the most numerous. The
narca produces its young in the autumn. The selache descend from the
ocean and deep water to the shore, to produce their young, both for the
sake of the warmth, and care of their offspring.

10. No other fish but the rhine and the batos have ever been observed
to unite with others not of their own kind, but there is a fish called
the rhinobatus, which has the head and upper part of the rhine, and
the lower part like the batus, as it were made up of both. The galei
and the galeoeides, as the alopex, dog-fish, and the flat fish, as the
narce batos, leiobatos and trygon, are in this manner ovoviparous.


CHAPTER XI.

1. The dolphin, whale, and other cetacea which have a blow-hole but no
gills, are viviparous, and so are the pristis and the bos. For none
of these have an ovum, but a proper fœtus, from which, when perfected,
an animal is developed, as in man and the viviparous quadrupeds. The
dolphin usually produces one, and sometimes two young ones. The whale
generally and usually produces two and sometimes one. The phocæna is
similar to the dolphin, for it is like a small dolphin. It is produced
in the Pontus. In some respects the phocæna differs from the dolphin,
for its size is smaller, it is wider in the back, and its colour is
blue. Many persons say that the phocæna is a kind of dolphin.

2. All these creatures which have a blow-hole, breathe and inhale
air; and the dolphin has been observed while asleep with the muzzle
above the water, and it snores in its sleep. The dolphin and phocæna
give milk and suckle their young. They also receive their young into
themselves. The growth of the young dolphins is rapid, for they attain
their full size in ten years. The female is pregnant for ten months.
The dolphin produces her young in the summer-time, and at no other
season. They seem also to disappear for thirty days during the season
of the dog-star. The young follow their dam for a long while, and it is
an animal much attached to its offspring. It lives many years; for some
have been known to live twenty-five or thirty years; for fishermen have
marked them by cutting their tails and then giving them their liberty.
In this way their age was known.

3. The seal is amphibious, for it does not inhale water, but breathes
and sleeps. It produces its young on land, but near the shore, in the
manner of animals with feet; but it lives the greater part of its time,
and obtains its food in the sea, wherefore it is to be considered among
aquatic animals. It is properly viviparous, and produces a living
creature, and a chorion, and it brings forth the other membranes like a
sheep. It produces one or two, never more than three young ones. It has
also mammæ, so that it suckles its young like quadrupeds. It produces
its young like the human subject, at all seasons of the year, but
especially with the earliest goats.

4. When the young are twelve days old, it leads them to the water
several times in the day, in order to habituate them by degrees. It
drags its hinder parts along, and does not walk, for it cannot erect
itself upon its feet, but it contracts and draws itself together. It
is fleshy and soft, and its bones are cartilaginous. It is difficult
to kill the seal by violence, unless it is struck upon the temple, for
its body is fleshy. It has a voice like an ox. The pudendum of the
female is like that of the batis, in all other animals of the class the
pudendum resembles that of the human female. This is the manner of the
development and nature of the young of aquatic animals which are either
internally or externally viviparous.


CHAPTER XII.

1. The oviparous fish have a divided uterus placed on the lower part of
the body, as I observed before. All that have scales are viviparous,
as the labrax, cestreus, cephalus, etelis,[204] and those called white
fish, and all smooth fish except the eel. Their ova resemble sand. This
appearance is owing to their uterus being quite full of ova, so that
small fish appear to have only two ova; for the small size and thinness
of the uterus renders it invisible in these creatures. I have before
treated of the sexual intercourse of fish. The sexes are distinct in
almost all fish, though there is some doubt about the erythrinus[205]
and the channa, for all these are found to be pregnant.

[204] Perhaps the Sea-bream, Sparus.

[205] Perhaps Perca marina.

2. Ova are found in those fish which have sexual intercourse, though
they possess them without intercourse. This is observable in some kinds
of river fish; for the phoxini[206] appear to be pregnant as soon as
they are born, and when they are quite small. They emit the ova in a
stream; and, as I observed before, the males devour great numbers of
them, and others perish in the water. Those are preserved which they
deposit in their appropriate situations. For, if all were preserved,
the numbers that would be found would be immense. Not all those that
are preserved are fertile, but only those on which the seminal fluid of
the male has been sprinkled. When the female produces her ova, the male
follows, and scatters his semen upon them. Young fish are produced from
those ova which are thus sprinkled. The remainder turn out as chance
may direct.

[206] Cyprinus Phoxinus.

3. The same thing also occurs in the malacia; for the male sepia
sprinkles the ova of the female as they are deposited; and it is
reasonable to suppose that the other malacia do the same, although it
has only been observed in the sepia. They produce their ova near the
land, the cobii deposit them upon stones, and that which they produce
is flat and sand-like. The rest do the same, for the parts near the
land are warmer, and provision is more abundant, and there is better
protection for their young against larger fish, for which cause very
great numbers deposit their ova near the river Thermodon, in the
Pontus, for the place is sheltered and warm, and the water is sweet.

4. The majority of viviparous fish reproduce once in a-year, except
the small phycides,[207] which reproduce twice a-year. The male phyces
differs from the female, being darker-coloured and having larger
scales. All other fish produce from seed, and emit ova; but that which
is called the belone, at the season of reproduction bursts asunder, and
in this way the ova escape; for this fish has a division beneath the
stomach and bowels, like the serpents called typhlinæ.[208] When it has
produced its ova, it survives, and the wound heals up again.

[207] Mugil. Some species of mullet.

[208] Lacerta apus.

5. The development of the ovum is alike, both in those that are
internally and those that are externally oviparous. For it takes
place at the extremity of the ovum, and it is enclosed in a membrane.
The eyes are the first part that is conspicuous; they are large and
spherical; so that it is plain that they are mistaken who say that
the mode of development resembles that of vermiform creatures, for in
them the order is different, and the lower parts are formed first, and
afterwards the head and eyes. When the ovum is taken away, they assume
a circular form, and for some time continue to grow without taking in
any food, by absorbing the moisture of the ovum. They afterwards derive
their nutriment, as long as they continue growing, from the water of
the river.

6. When the Pontus is cleansed, something is floated out into the
Hellespont which is called fucus. It is of a yellow colour. Some say
that it is naturally a plant. This takes place at the beginning of
summer. The oysters and small fish which live in these places feed
upon this fucus; and some maritime persons say that they obtain their
purple from this plant.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. The pond and river fish begin to reproduce usually when five months
old. They all produce their ova at the beginning of summer. Like the
marine fish, the females of these kinds never emit all their ova, nor
the males all their semen, at once; but both sexes are always found to
contain a portion of the reproductive substance; they produce their
ova at the proper season. The cyprinus five or six times a-year, and
especially under the influence of the stars. The chalcis reproduces
three times, all the rest but once a-year.

2. They deposit their ova in the stagnant parts of rivers and ponds
among the reeds, as the phoxinus and perca. The glanis and the
perca produce their ova in strings, like the frog. That which the
perca produces is so involved that, on account of its breadth, the
fishermen collect it together from among the reeds in ponds. The
larger individuals of the glanis produce their ova in deep water, some
where it is a fathom deep; but the smaller ones in shallow water, and
especially at the root of the willow or some other tree, and among the
reeds and mosses.

3. The fish fold themselves together, sometimes a large one with a
small one, and approximate the passages, which some call their navel,
from which they eject their respective seminal matter, the females
their ova, and the males their spermatic fluid. Those ova with which
the semen of the male has been mixed immediately or in the course of a
day become whiter and larger, and in a short time the eyes of the fish
make their appearance; for in all fish, as in other animals, this part
is most conspicuous, and appears the largest. But, if the seminal fluid
does not touch any of the ova, as in the case of sea-fish, these become
useless and barren.

4. From the fertile ova, as the fish increase in size, something like a
shell is separated; this is the membrane which envelopes the ovum and
the embryo fish. As soon as the seminal fluid is mixed with the ova a
glutinous matter is formed, which fastens them to the roots or other
substance on which they are deposited. The male watches over the place
where the greatest number of ova are deposited, and the female departs
as soon as she has spawned. The development of the ovum of the glanis
proceeds the most slowly, for the male remains by them for forty or
fifty days, in order that they may not be devoured by fish chancing to
come that way.

5. Next to this is the cyprinus. The ova, however, of these which
are preserved escape very quickly. The development in some of the
small fish takes place on the third day, and the ova upon which the
seminal fluid has fallen begin to increase on the same day, or shortly
afterwards. The ova of the glanis become as large as the seed of the
orobus. Those of the cyprinus and that class, about the size of millet.
The ova of these fish are produced and developed in this manner.

6. The chalcis assembles in great numbers to deposit its ova in deep
water. The fish which is called tilon deposits its ova near the shore,
in sheltered places; this fish also is gregarious. The cyprinus,
balerus, and all others, so to say, hasten into shallow water to
deposit their ova, and thirteen or fourteen males often follow a single
female, and when the female has deposited her ova and departed, the
males that follow her sprinkle their semen upon them. The majority of
the ova are lost, for the female scatters them abroad as she is moving
forward, unless they fall upon any substance, and are not carried away
by the stream. None of them, except the glanis, watch their ova, unless
the cyprinus meets with them in great numbers, when, they say, that
this fish watches them.

7. All the male fish have semen, except the eel, and this one has
neither semen nor ova. The cestreus migrates from the sea into lakes
and rivers; the eel, on the contrary, leaves them for the sea. Most
fish, therefore, as I observed, proceed from ova.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. Some originate in mud and sand: even of those kinds which originate
in sexual intercourse and ova, some, they say, have appeared both
in other marshy places and in those which once surrounded Cnidus,
which became dry under the influence of the dog-star, and all the mud
was parched up, but with the first rains the waters returned, and
small fish appeared with the return of the waters. This was a kind
of cestreus, which originates in coition, about the size of small
mænidia,[209] but they had neither ova nor semen. In the Asiatic
rivers, which do not flow into the sea, other small fish, of the size
of epseti,[210] are produced in the same manner. Some persons say that
the cestreus is always produced in this manner, but in this they are
mistaken, for both the females are known to have ova and the males
semen. But there is some one kind of them which originates in mud and
sand.

[209] Sardine.

[210] Atherine epsetos.

2. It is evident from the following considerations that some of them
are of spontaneous growth, and do not originate either in ova or semen.
Those which are neither oviparous nor viviparous are all produced
either from mud or sand, or from the putrid matter on the surface, as
also the foam in sandy places produces the aphya.[211] This aphya never
increases in size, and is barren, and as time advances it perishes, and
another fry is formed. Wherefore it may be said to be reproduced at
every season, except for a short time; for it continues from the autumn
arcturus to the spring. This is a proof that it sometimes originates
in the soil, for it is not captured by fishermen in cold weather, but
on a fine day it may be taken as it comes up from the ground for the
sake of the warmth. When they have dragged the ground and scraped up
the surface, the fish are more numerous and better. The other aphyæ are
inferior, on account of their rapid growth.

[211] Melanurus juvenculus.

3. They are found in shady and marshy places, when the earth becomes
warm in fine weather, as near the temple of Athene in Salamis, and near
the tomb of Themistocles, and near Marathon, for foam is formed in
all these places. It makes its appearance in such places, and in fine
weather: it appears also at times in seasons of much rain, and when
foam is formed of rain water, wherefore also it is called aphrus; and
sometimes it is found on the surface of the sea, in fine weather, where
it is whirled about, and, like the little maggots in dung, so this is
found in the foam which floats on the surface; wherefore also this
aphya is carried by the sea in many directions, and it abounds and is
captured in the greatest abundance when the season is moist and warm.

4. There is another aphya derived from fish, for that which is
called cobitis is derived from small and inferior gobii, which bury
themselves in the earth. The membrades are produced from the phalerica.
The trichides come from these, and the trichiæ from the trichides; from
one kind of aphya, which inhabits the port of Athens, the encrasicoli
are derived. There is another kind of aphya which originates in the
mœnis and cestreus, but the barren aphrus is very soft, and endures
only for a short time, as I said before, and at last nothing is left
but the head and eyes. The fishermen, however, have now found a mode of
conveying it from place to place, for it lasts longer when salted.


CHAPTER XV.

1. Eels are not produced from sexual intercourse, nor are they
oviparous, nor have they ever been detected with semen or ova, nor
when dissected do they appear to possess either seminal or uterine
viscera; and this is the only kind of sanguineous animal which does
not originate either in sexual intercourse or in ova. It is, however,
manifest that this is the case, for, after rain, they have been
reproduced in some marshy ponds, from which all the water was drawn
and the mud cleaned out; but they are never produced in dry places nor
in ponds that are always full, for they live upon and are nourished by
rain water. It is plain, therefore, that they are not produced either
from sexual intercourse or from ova. Some persons have thought that
they were productive, because some eels have parasitical worms, and
they thought that these became eels.

2. This, however, is not the case, but they originate in what are
called the entrails of the earth, which are found spontaneously in
mud and moist earth. They have been observed making their escape from
them, and others have been found in them when cut up and dissected.
These originate both in the sea and in rivers wherein putrid matter is
abundant; in those places in the sea which are full of fuci, and near
the banks of rivers and ponds, for in these places the heat causes much
putridity. This is the mode of generation in eels.


CHAPTER XVI.

1. The reproductive function is not active in all fish at the same time
or the same manner, nor are they pregnant during the same length of
time. Before the season of sexual intercourse the males and females
begin to assemble, and at the period of intercourse and the production
of their ova they pair together. Some of them do not remain pregnant
more than thirty days, and others not so long; but all of them remain
so for a number of days, which can be distributed into seven. Those
which some persons call marini remain pregnant for the longest period.
The sargus becomes pregnant in the month of December, and remains so
for thirty days. The kind of cestreus which some persons call the
chelon and the myxon are pregnant at the same time as the sargus. All
these suffer in their pregnancy, wherefore they are driven to the shore
at this season; for in the vehemence of their desire they are carried
towards the land, and always continue in motion during this period till
they have produced their ova. The cestreus is more remarkable for this
than any other fish. As soon as they have deposited their ova, they
become quiet.

2. In many fish there is a limit to their reproductive powers, when
worms make their appearance in their abdomen. These worms are small
living creatures, which expel the reproductive substance. The small
fry of the rhyas makes its appearance in the spring, and that of many
others about the vernal equinox. Other fish do not produce at this
season of the year, but in the summer or near the autumnal equinox.

3. The atherina produces its young first of all, near the land. The
cephalus is the last. This is evident from the small fry of the former
appearing first, and that of the latter last of all. The cestreus also
produces among the first. The salpa in most places deposits its ova
during the summer, and sometimes in the autumn. The aulopias, which
they call anthias, produces its ova in the summer season. After these
the chrysophrys, labrax, mormyrus, and all those which are called
dromades; the trigla and cocarinus are the latest of all the gregarious
fish. These oviposit in the autumn. The trigla deposits her ova in the
mud, which causes her to be late, for the mud continues cold for a long
while. The coracimus is next to the trigla, and goes among the sea
weed to deposit her ova: consequently they frequent rocky places. It
continues pregnant for a long while. The mænides oviposit at the winter
solstice. Many other marine fish oviposit in the summer, for they are
not captured at this period. The mænis is the most productive of all
fish, and the batrachus the most so among the selache. They are,
however, rare, for they perish very readily; they oviposit in shoals
and near the land.

4. The selache, as being viviparous, are less productive. These are
particularly preserved by their large size. The belone is late in
producing its young, and many of them are burst by their ova in the act
of parturition; for these ova are not so numerous as they are large.
They surround the parent as if they were phalangia; for she produces
them attached to herself, and if any one touches them they make their
escape. The atherina deposits her ova by rubbing her abdomen against
the sand. The thynni burst with fat. They live two years. The fishermen
argue thus: when the thynnides fail one year, the thynni fail the year
after. They appear to be a year older than the pelamus.

5. The thynni and scombri copulate at the end of February, and produce
their young at the beginning of June. They produce their ova, as it
were, in a purse. The growth of the thynnides is rapid; for when these
fish produce their young in the Pontus, they produce from the ovum
creatures which some persons call scordylæ, and the Byzantines call
auxidæ, because they grow in a few days. They go out in the autumn
with the thynnus, and return in the spring as pelamides. Nearly all
other fish grow rapidly, but those in the Pontus more rapidly than in
other places; for the amiæ there increase visibly every day. It is
necessary to remember that the same fish have not in the same place
the identical time of coition and gestation, nor the same period of
reproduction and completion of their offspring. For those which are
called coracini produce their ova at the time of wheat harvest, though,
generally speaking, the order of their reproduction is that which I
have mentioned.

6. The conger also becomes pregnant, though this circumstance is not
equally distinct everywhere on account of its fat; for the organ of
reproduction is long, like that of serpents. It becomes distinct,
however, when laid upon the fire; for the fat smokes and consumes
away, and the ova, when pressed, jump out with a cracking noise. If
any person will feel and rub them with the finger, the fat will appear
smooth and the ova rough to the touch. Some congers have fat but no
ova; and others, on the contrary, have no fat but such ova as I have
described. We have now treated of nearly all the oviparous animals,
whether furnished with fins, or wings, or feet, and of their sexual
intercourse, gestation, development, and such like subjects.


CHAPTER XVII.

1. We must now treat of the nature of viviparous animals with feet
and of man at this period. We have already treated in general and in
particular of their mode of coition. It is common to all animals to
be elevated with the desire and pleasure of sexual intercourse. The
females become savage when their young are produced, the males at the
season of coition; for horses bite each other and drive about and
pursue their riders. The wild boars are very savage at this season,
although coition renders them weak.

2. And they fight wonderfully among themselves, and make themselves
as it were breastplates, and render their skin callous beforehand by
rubbing themselves against trees and frequently wallowing in the mud
and drying themselves. They fight together and drive each other out of
the herd so fiercely, that not rarely both of them perish in the fight.
The same is the nature of bulls, rams, and goats; for although at other
seasons they pasture together, at the period of copulation they quarrel
and fight together. The male camel also is violent at this time,
whether it is a man or a camel that approaches him, and he will at all
times fight with a horse.

3. The nature of wild animals is the same. For bears, wolves, and lions
are savage if they are approached at this season; but they do not
quarrel much among themselves, for none of them are gregarious. The
she bears are savage in defence of their cubs, and bitches for their
puppies. Elephants also become wild at this period. Wherefore they say
that in India those who have the care of them do not permit them to
have sexual intercourse with the females; for they become mad at such
season and overturn the houses, which are badly built, and do many
other violent acts. They say also that abundance of food will render
them more gentle. They also bring others among them which are directed
to beat them, and so they punish them and reduce them to a state of
discipline.

4. Those creatures which have frequent sexual intercourse, like
domestic animals, as the hog and dog, appear to be less influenced by
these circumstances on account of the frequency of their coition. Of
all females the mare is the most violent in her sexual desires, and
then the cow. Mares are subject to the affection called hippomania, and
this name is transferred from this single animal to intemperate and
lascivious persons. They are said to be affected by the wind at such
seasons: wherefore in Crete they never separate the stallions from the
mares. When the mares are thus affected, they separate themselves from
the other horses. In swine the same affection is called καπρίζειν, to
desire the boar. They never run to the east or the west, but either
north or south.

5. When they suffer from this affection, they will allow no one to
approach them, till they either are so fatigued that they can go no
further, or come to the sea: they then eject some substance, which
has received the name of hippomanes, like that on a new-born colt. It
resembles the capria of the sow. Poisoners diligently seek for this
substance. At the season of sexual intercourse they lean upon each
other more than at other times, and move their tails, and utter a
different sound from that which is common to them. A fluid like semen
also flows from their genital organs, but it is much more thin than
that of the male; and some persons call this fluid hippomanes, though
it is not that which is produced upon colts. It is difficult to collect
this fluid, for it does not appear in large quantities. When they
are desirous of sexual intercourse, they often make water, and sport
together: this is the nature of horses.

6. Cows desire the bull. They are so taken up by their passion, that
the cowherds cannot manage them. Mares and cows shew the vehemence of
their desire by the swelling of their genital parts. Cows also, like
mares, make water very frequently. The cows also mount upon the bull,
and follow, and stand beside him. The younger animals, both among
horses and oxen, are the first to desire sexual intercourse; and in
fine weather, when their health is good, the vehemence of their desire
is still stronger. If the manes of the mares are cut, their desires
become weaker, and they are rendered more gentle.

7. The stallions recognise the mares of their own herds by the scent;
and if any strangers become mixed with them a few days before the
period of coition, they bite them till they go away, and each stallion
feeds apart with his own mares. Thirty mares, or rather less, are given
to each; and if any male approaches, he turns and goes round the mares
in a circle, and then prepares to fight. If any one of the females
attempts to move, he bites and prevents her.

8. At the season of sexual intercourse the bull pastures with the cows,
and fights with other bulls: at other times the sexes keep themselves
separate: this is called ἀτιμαγελεῖν (despising the herd); those in
Epirus are often not seen for three months: and generally all, or
nearly all, wild animals, do not herd with their females before the
season of sexual intercourse: but as soon as they come to puberty the
males separate themselves, and cease to feed with the females. Sows,
when they are urged by sexual desire, or, as it is called, desire the
boar (καπρᾳν), will even attack men. In bitches this affection is
called σκυζᾳν, to desire the dog.

9. When females are urged with desire, their genital organs are swollen
with heat, and a fluid secretion takes place. Mares scatter about
a white fluid at this season. In no creatures are the catamenia so
abundant as in women. In sheep and goats at the season of coition,
there are certain signs before copulation: there are also signs after
copulation, but these again cease till the period of parturition,
when they again occur. By this means shepherds understand that they
are about to produce their young. After parturition there is a great
purification, which at first is not very full of blood, but becomes so
afterwards.

10. In the cow, the ass, and mare, this purification is abundant, on
account of their great size; but still it is small, considering how
large they are. When the cow is urged by desire, she undergoes a brief
purification, about half-a-cup full, or a little more. The time of
this purification is peculiarly the period for sexual intercourse. Of
all quadrupeds the mare suffers the least, and is the most cleanly in
parturition: neither is her loss of blood great considering the size
of the animal. In cows and mares, the failure of the catamenia in the
second, fourth, and sixth month is considered as a sign of pregnancy;
but it is not easy for anyone to understand this, who does not follow
and accustom himself to them: and some persons are of opinion that they
have no catamenia. The female oreus has no catamenia, but her urine is
thicker than that of the male.

11. On the whole, the liquid excrements are thicker in other animals
than in man; and those of female sheep and goats thicker than in the
males of the same animal. That of the she ass is thinner, of the cow is
harsher, than of their respective males. After parturition the urine
of all creatures becomes thicker, and especially in those which have
no purification. When females begin to feel sexual desires, their milk
is like pus; it afterwards becomes useful after parturition. Sheep and
goats become fat when they are pregnant, and consume more food; and so
do cows, and all other quadrupeds.


CHAPTER XVIII.

1. Generally speaking, the sexual desires of animals are more violent
in spring. They do not all, however, copulate at the same seasons,
but at the time of year which will cause them to produce their young
at the proper season. The period of gestation in domestic swine is
four months. They never produce more than twenty pigs; and if they
have many, they cannot bring them all up. When aged, they produce in
the same manner, but they copulate more slowly. They become pregnant
with one act of coition; but they submit themselves to the boar very
frequently, on account of their rejection of the capria after they are
pregnant. This takes place in all, but some will also eject the semen.

2. If any of the pigs are injured or deteriorated during pregnancy, it
is called metachæron. This may take place in any part of the uterus. In
parturition the sow gives the first teat to the first pig. It is not
necessary that she should go to the boar as soon as the sexual appetite
is felt, or before her ears begin to hang down; for otherwise she
desires to go again. If she goes to the boar when she is desirous of
it, the impregnation is complete in a single act of intercourse. Barley
is a proper food for the boar at the period of coition. It should be
cooked for the female after parturition. Some sows produce excellent
pigs from the first; others do not produce good offspring and pigs till
they are grown up. Some persons say that if one of the eyes of a sow
is put out, she generally speaking dies very soon. Most of them live
fifteen. Some die in less than twenty years.


CHAPTER XIX.

1. Sheep become pregnant after three or four acts of sexual
intercourse. If rain falls after the act of intercourse, it must be
repeated. The nature of goats is the same. They generally produce two,
and sometimes three. Cases have occurred of their producing four. The
period of gestation in the sheep and goat is five months; and in some
places, where the weather is warm and fine, and food is abundant, they
have young twice a-year. The goat will live eight years. The sheep
lives ten years, or generally rather less; but the leaders of the flock
live fifteen years; for in every flock they select one of the males
as a leader, who, when called by the shepherd, places himself at the
head of the flock. They are accustomed to this duty even when young. In
Ethiopia the sheep live twelve or thirteen years, and the goats ten or
eleven.

2. Both the sheep and goat enjoy sexual intercourse as long as they
live. Sheep and goats produce twins, if either the pasture is good, or
the ram or he-goat, or the ewe belongs to a race producing twins. They
produce females or males both from the nature of the water (for there
are some waters that cause them to produce males and others females)
and from their manner of sexual intercourse; and if the wind is
northward during copulation they produce males; and if it is southward,
females; and one which naturally produces females will change its
nature and produce males; so that it is necessary to see that they
stand to the north during the act of sexual intercourse. If any are
accustomed to copulate early, and the ram is introduced to them late,
they will not endure it.

3. The lambs are white or black according as the veins beneath the
tongue of the ram are white or black; for the lambs are white if
the veins are white, and black if they are black. If they are both
black and white, the lambs also are of two colours; and if red, then
the lambs are red. They are more ready for sexual intercourse if
they drink salt water; so that they should be supplied with salted
water both before and after parturition, and again in the spring.
The herdsmen do not constitute any leader among the flocks of goats,
because it is not their nature to be stationary, but they are active
and ready to move from place to place. If the older sheep prepare for
sexual intercourse at the proper time, the shepherds consider it a sign
of a good year for the sheep; if the younger ones are ready first, it
will be a bad sheep year.


CHAPTER XX.

1. There are many kinds of dogs. The Lacedemonian dogs, both male and
female, begin to have sexual intercourse at eight months old. Some
also lift their leg to make water about this period. The bitch becomes
pregnant with a single act of coition; this is particularly evident
in those which perform the act in secret, for they become pregnant
when once united. The period of gestation in the Lacedemonian bitch is
the sixth part of a year, that is sixty days, or it may be one, two,
or three days more or less. The puppies when they are born are blind
for twelve days. The bitch is ready for sexual intercourse six months
after she has produced her young, and not sooner. In some the period
of gestation is the fifth part of a year, this is seventy-two days.
The puppies of such bitches are blind for fourteen days. Others are
pregnant the fourth part of a year, that is three whole months; their
puppies are blind seventeen days. The female appears to desire the male
for the same length of time.

2. The catamenia in bitches last for seven days, and at the same time
the genital organs are swollen with heat; during this period they will
not endure coition, but during the seven days which follow, for they
all appear usually to desire the male for fourteen days. This affection
continues in some for sixteen days. The purification from parturition
takes place at the birth of the young ones; it is thick and phlegmatic,
and the quantity produced in parturition is small in proportion to the
size of the body.[212] Bitches generally have milk five days before
parturition; in some cases it appears seven, and in others four
days beforehand; the milk is good as soon as the young are born. The
Lacedemonian bitch gives milk in thirty days after sexual intercourse;
at first it is thick, but becomes thinner afterwards. The milk of the
bitch is thicker than that of other animals, except the sow and the
hare.

[212] (Or perhaps) after parturition the discharge becomes thinner in
consistence.

3. There is evidence of their having reached the age of puberty,
for as in the human subject the mammæ begin to enlarge and become
cartilaginous; it is, however, difficult to detect this without
practice, for the enlargement is not very great. This takes place in
the female, nothing of the kind occurs in the male. The males generally
begin to lift up their leg to make water when they are six months old.
Some do not do so till they are eight months old, and others before
they are six months old, for, to speak plainly, they do this as soon
as they reach puberty; all the females sit down to make water; some,
however, even of these lift up their leg for this purpose. The female
never produces more than twelve puppies, generally five or six, and
sometimes only one; those of Lacedæmon generally have eight; both sexes
continue to enjoy sexual intercourse as long as they live.

4. It is a peculiarity of the Lacedemonian dog, that it is more ready
for sexual intercourse after hard work than when idle; the male of
this kind lives ten years, the female for twelve, most other dogs live
fourteen or fifteen years, some even twenty, for which reason some
persons think that Homer is right when he makes the dog of Ulysses to
have died at the age of twenty. On account of the hard work which the
Lacedemonian dogs have to endure the female lives longer than the male;
in other races this is not so plainly observed, but the male is usually
longer lived than the female. The dog does not shed any teeth except
those called the canine teeth, these are shed by both sexes at four
months old. Because they shed these only, a question is raised, for
some persons altogether deny that they shed only two teeth, for it is
difficult to meet with these, and others, when they see that they shed
these, think that they must shed all their teeth. People judge of the
age of a dog by its teeth, for in young dogs they are white and sharp,
in old ones they are black and blunted.


CHAPTER XXI.

1. The cow is impregnated with a single act of coition, and the bull
mounts upon her with such violence that she bends beneath his weight.
If he fails to impregnate her after twenty days, she is again admitted
to the bull. Old bulls will not mount the same cow several times in the
same day unless there is some intermission, but young bulls, incited by
the strength of their desires, will force the same cow several times,
and will mount upon many in succession. The bull is one of the least
lascivious of animals. The conqueror copulates with the female, but if
he become impotent from frequent sexual intercourse, the inferior will
attack him, and often prevail.

2. Both the male and the female commence sexual intercourse, so as to
produce young, at a year old, though not generally till they are a year
and eight months old, or two years old according to general agreement.
The female is pregnant nine months, and produces her young in the tenth
month; some persons affirm that parturition takes place at ten months
to a day; if any of them calve before the above mentioned time, the
calf is abortive and does not live, and even if born a little before
the proper time it cannot live, for the hoofs are imperfect. The female
generally produces one at a time, sometimes two. She continues to bear
and to have sexual intercourse as long as she lives.

3. The female usually lives fifteen years, and so does the male if he
is not castrated; some live for more than twenty years if they have an
active body. They usually place castrated oxen as leaders of the herd,
as they do in sheep, and these live longer than the others, for they do
no work, and feed in a superior pasture. They attain perfection at five
years old, wherefore some say that Homer was right when he spoke of the
male flourishing at five years old, and the cow at nine years old, for
both expressions have the same meaning.

4. Oxen change their teeth at two years old, not all of them, however,
but only like the horse; they do not cast their hoofs when they are
lame, but only swell very much about the feet. The milk is good
immediately after calving, but the cow has no milk beforehand. The
milk which is first formed becomes hard like a stone when it is
coagulated; this takes place if it is not mixed with water. They do not
produce young before they are a year old, except in some remarkable
cases, for some have been known to copulate at four months old. Most
of them desire sexual intercourse in the months of April and May.
Some, however, are not impregnated before the autumn. When many become
pregnant and admit the male, it is a sign of cold and rainy weather.
The usual discharges occur in cows as they do in mares, but the
quantity is less.


CHAPTER XXII.

1. Both the horse and mare begin to use sexual intercourse at two years
old. Such early cases, however, are rare, and their offspring small and
weak; and generally they commence at three years old, and they continue
to produce better colts till they are twenty years old. The period of
gestation is eleven months; parturition takes place in the twelfth. The
male does not impregnate the female in any particular number of days;
but at times in one, two, or three, sometimes in more. The ass mounts
and impregnates more quickly than the horse; and the act of intercourse
is not laborious in horses as it is in oxen. Next to the human subject,
the horse in both sexes is the most lascivious of all animals. The
sexual intercourse of the younger horses takes place before the usual
age according to the goodness and abundance of their food. The horse
generally produces but one colt, or sometimes two at the outside. The
hemionus has also been known to produce two, but this is considered
extraordinary. The horse begins sexual intercourse at thirty months
old, so that it can produce proper colts when it has done changing
its teeth. Some have been known, they say, to impregnate mares while
changing their teeth, unless they were naturally barren.

2. The horse has forty teeth. It sheds its four first teeth at thirty
months old, two above and two below. A year afterwards, it sheds four
more in the same manner, two above and two below. And again, at the
end of the next year, it sheds four more in the same manner. When it
is four years and a half old, it sheds no more; and individuals have
been known to shed them all at first, and others that have shed them
all in the last year. These circumstances are rare, so that it usually
happens that the horse is most fit for sexual intercourse at four years
and a half old. The older horses are more full of semen, both the males
and the females, than younger ones. Horses will copulate both with
their dams and with their offspring; and it is thought to be a sign
that the herd is complete, when they copulate with their offspring. The
Scythians ride upon their pregnant mares when the embryo begins to turn
in the uterus, and say that it renders parturition more easy. All other
quadrupeds lie down in the act of parturition; wherefore their young
are always produced lying on their side; but when the mare feels that
the time for parturition is approaching, she stands upright to part
with her colt.

3. Horses generally live eighteen or twenty years; some live
twenty-five or thirty years; but if they are carefully treated, their
life may be extended to fifty years. Thirty years, however, is a very
long life for the male, and twenty-five for the female. Some have been
known to live forty years. Males live a shorter time than females, on
account of the act of sexual intercourse; and those that are brought up
separately longer than those which live in herds. Females attain their
proper length and height in five years; the males in six. In six more
years the fulness of body is acquired, which continues till they are
twenty years old. The females attain perfection more rapidly than the
males; but in the uterus the males are the more rapidly developed. This
is also the case in the human subject. This also takes place in those
animals which produce several at a birth.

4. They say that the mule sucks for six months, but the mare will not
permit it to come afterwards, because it drags and hurts her. The horse
sucks for a longer time. The horse and the mule attain perfection after
casting their teeth; and when they have cast them all, it is not easy
to know their age. Wherefore they say that, before casting its teeth,
the horse has its mark, which it has not afterwards. After the teeth
have been changed, the age is usually ascertained by the canine tooth;
for that in riding horses is generally worn down, for the bridle rubs
against it. In horses which have not been ridden, it is large and not
worn. In young horses it is small and sharp.

5. The male copulates at all seasons, and as long as he lives; the
female also as long as she lives; and at all seasons, unless they
have on a fastening or some other hindrance, no peculiar time is
appropriated for copulation in either sex, for there is no period of
coition when they cannot also bring up their young. In Opus there was
a horse in a herd which engendered when he was forty years old; but it
was necessary to lift up his fore legs for him. Mares begin to desire
sexual intercourse in the spring; and when the mare has foaled, she
does not become pregnant again immediately, but waits for a time, and
produces better foals at the end of four or five years. It is quite
necessary that she should wait one year, and should pass through a
fallow, as it were.

6. The horse, then, bears young at intervals, as I have observed; but
the ass is not subject to intervals. Some mares are quite barren, and
others, though they conceive, yet do not produce their young; and they
give as a reason for this, that upon dissection the fœtus was found to
contain other reniform bodies round the kidneys, so that it appeared
to have four kidneys. As soon as the mare has foaled, she eats the
chorion, and bites from the head of her foal the substance called
hippomanes. In size this substance is somewhat less than a dry fig.
Its form is flat and round, and its colour black. If any person is at
hand to take it before the mare, and she smells it, the scent renders
her wild and mad. For this reason it is sought after and collected by
poisoners. If an ass copulates with a pregnant mare, the pre-existing
fœtus is destroyed. Those who keep herds of horses do not place a
leader over them, as they do over oxen, for they are not naturally
stationary, but active and wandering.


CHAPTER XXIII.

1. The male and female ass begin to copulate at thirty months old, and
shed their first teeth at the same period. They lose their second pair
of teeth six months afterwards, and their third and fourth in the same
way. These fourth teeth are called the marking teeth. Sometimes the
ass has become pregnant and brought up its young at a year old. The
she ass parts with the semen after coition, if she is not prevented;
and therefore, immediately after coition, they beat her and drive her
about. She foals in the twelfth month, and generally produces one foal,
for this is their nature, though cases of twin births have occurred. If
an ass mounts upon a mare, he destroys her fœtus, as I observed before.
But the horse does not destroy the fœtus of the ass, if the mare has
been impregnated by a he ass.

2. The pregnant female has milk at the end of ten months. After
parturition, she will admit the male on the seventh day, and is very
easily impregnated at that period. She will also receive it afterwards.
If she does not produce young before losing her marking teeth, she can
never be impregnated all the rest of her life. She does not like men
to be witnesses of her parturition, nor will she produce her young in
the day time; but when it is dark she retires, and so produces her
young. She continues to procreate during her whole life, if she has
begun before losing her marking teeth. The ass lives more than thirty
years, and the female longer than the male. When a horse copulates
with an ass, or a he ass with a mare, abortion is more frequent than
between congeners, a horse with a mare, or two asses together. When the
horse and ass are mixed together, the period of gestation follows from
the male parent. I mean to say that it takes the same time as if the
parents had been congeners; but in size, form, and strength the produce
of their union generally resembles the female parent.

3. If the union takes place frequently, and sufficient time is not
allowed to intervene, the female soon becomes barren. For which reason
those who attend to this business do not permit them to have continual
intercourse, but interpose a proper interval. The mare will not admit
the he ass, nor the she ass the horse, unless the he ass has been
suckled by a mare. They are careful, therefore, to admit only those
asses which they call hippothelæ, _i.e._ asses which have been suckled
by a mare. These copulate by force in the pastures, like horses.


CHAPTER XXIV.

1. The oreus (mule) mounts and copulates after shedding the first
teeth, and when seven years old is able to engender; and the ginnus is
produced when he mounts upon a mare. After this he no longer continues
to copulate. The female oreus also has been impregnated, but the
fœtus has never been known to come to maturity. The hemioni (female
mules) of Syria, near Phœnicia, admit the male and procreate. The kind,
however, though similar, is not the same. Those which are called ginni
are produced from a mare, when the fœtus has received some injury in
the uterus, like dwarfs among men and metachœra among swine; and the
ginnus, like the dwarf, has a large genital organ.

2. The hemionus has a long life; for they have been known to live
for eighty years, as in Athens, when they built the temple, this
individual, though failing with age, helped in drawing, and went beside
them, and encouraged the yoke mules to their work, so that an edict was
made, commanding the corn-dealers not to drive it away from the vessels
filled with corn. The female mule (oreus) grows old sooner than the
male. Some persons say that she is purified when making water, but the
male ages more rapidly from smelling the urine.

3. This is the manner of the reproduction of these animals. Those who
are employed in bringing up these animals recognize the young from the
old in this way. If the skin, when drawn back from the cheek, soon
recovers its shape, the animal is young; if the skin continues wrinkled
for a long while, the creature is aged.


CHAPTER XXV.

1. The camel is pregnant ten months, and always produces a single
young one, for this is its nature. They separate the young camel from
the herd at a year old. The camel will live more than fifty years.
The season of parturition is in the spring, and the female continues
to give milk until she conceives again. Their flesh and milk are
exceedingly sweet. The milk is drunk mixed with two or three times its
quantity of water.

2. Elephants begin to copulate at twenty years old. When the female is
impregnated, her period of gestation, some persons say, is a year and a
half; other people make it three years. The difficulty of seeing their
copulation causes this difference of opinion respecting the period of
gestation. The female produces her young bending upon her haunches. Her
pain is evident. The calf, when it is born, sucks with its mouth, and
not with its proboscis. It can walk and see as soon as it is born.

3. Wild swine copulate at the beginning of winter. They produce their
young in the spring. For this purpose the female gets away into
inaccessible and precipitous places, where there are caves and plenty
of shade. The males remain with the females for thirty days. The number
of pigs and the period of gestation are the same as in the domesticated
herd, and their voices are much alike: the female, however, grunts
more and the male less. The castration of the male makes them larger
and more fierce, as Homer writes. "He brought up a castrated wild
boar, which was not like a beast fed upon food, but resembled a woody
mountain peak." Castration takes place from a disease like a swelling
in the testicles, which they rub against the trees and so destroy them.


CHAPTER XXVI.

1. The female deer usually copulates, as I observed before, from
allurement; for she cannot endure the male on account of the hardness
of the penis. Some, however, endure copulation as sheep do. When sexual
desire is felt, they lie down beside each other. The male is changeable
in his disposition, and does not unite himself to a single female,
but in a short time leaves one for another. The season for sexual
intercourse is in August and September, after Arcturus. The period of
gestation is eight months. The female becomes pregnant in a few days,
and frequently in one day.

2. She generally produces one fawn, though some have been known to
bear twins. She produces her young by the road side, for fear of
wild beasts. The growth of the fawns is rapid. The female has no
purification at other times, but after parturition her cleansing is
sanguineous. The female usually conducts her fawn to some accustomed
place, which serves them for a refuge. It is usually an opening in a
rock, with but one entrance, where they can defend themselves against
those who would attack them.

3. There are fables about their long life. They do not, however,
appear to be worthy of credit; and the period of gestation and growth
of the young does not agree with the habits of long-lived animals. In
the mountain called Elaphoïs, in Arginusa, in Asia, where Alcibiades
died, all the deer have their ears divided, so that they can be known
if they migrate to another place, and even the fœtus in utero has this
distinction. The females have four nipples, like cows.

4. As soon as the females are impregnated, the males go and live apart
from them, and, urged by their sexual desires, they each go apart and
make a hole, in which they emit a strong smell like he goats, and
their faces become black, by being sprinkled like those of goats. This
continues till after rain, when they turn again to their pasture. The
animal acts in this way on account of its violent sexual desires and
its fatness. In summer time this is so great that they cannot run, but
are taken by those who pursue them, even on foot, in the second or
third race.

5. They frequent the water both on account of the heat and the
difficulty of breathing. At the period of sexual intercourse, their
flesh is inferior both in taste and smell, like that of he-goats. In
winter they are thin and weak, and in the spring are most active for
the chase. When chased, they sometimes rest awhile, and remain standing
till their pursuers come up with them, when they start afresh. They
seem to do this from a pain in their intestines; for their viscera are
so thin and weak that if they are only struck gently they are ruptured,
though the hide remains sound.


CHAPTER XXVII.

1. Bears perform the act of sexual intercourse in the manner already
described, not mounting upon each other, but lying down upon the
ground. The female is pregnant thirty days, when she produces one or
two, or at the outside five cubs. The fœtus is smaller, in proportion
to the size of the parent, than that of any other animal; for it is
less than a weasel, and greater than a mouse. It is without hair and
blind, and its legs and almost all its parts are without joints. Its
season of sexual intercourse is in March. The cubs are born at the time
of concealment. At this season both the female and the male are very
fat. When they have brought up their young, they show themselves in the
third month of the spring. The porcupine also conceals itself, and is
pregnant for the same number of days, and in other respects resembles
the bear. It is very difficult to capture the she bear when pregnant.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

1. It has already been observed that the lion both copulates and makes
water backwards. They do not copulate and produce their young at all
seasons of the year, though they produce annually. The young are
produced in the spring. The female generally produces two, never more
than six, and sometimes only one. The fable which says that the uterus
is ejected in parturition is a mistake. It has arisen from the rarity
of the animal, those who invented the fable being ignorant of the true
state of the case. The race of lions is rare, and not to be found in
every place, but only in the country between the Achelous and the
Nessus in the whole of Europe. The young of the lion are very small at
their birth, so that they can hardly walk at two months old. The Syrian
lions produce five times; at first five cubs, and then one less every
time. After this they produce no more, but continue barren. The lioness
has no mane, though the lion has. The lion only sheds its four canine
teeth, two above and two below. They are shed when the animal is six
months old.

2. The hyæna is of the colour of the wolf, but it is more hairy, and
has a mane along the ridge of its back. It is a mistake to say that
each individual has the sexual organs of both sexes. That of the male
resembles the same organ in the wolf and the dog. That which has
been imagined to be the female organ is placed beneath the tail, and
it resembles that of the female, but is imperforate, and the anus
is beneath it. The female hyena has an organ similar to that which
bears its name in the male. It is placed beneath the tail, and is
imperforate. Beneath this is the anus, and below this again the true
genital organ. The female hyena has an uterus like that of other
animals of the class, but the female is rarely captured. A certain
hunter said that he caught eleven hyænas of which only one was a female.

3. Hares copulate backwards, as I formerly observed, for it is a
retromingent animal. They copulate and produce their young at all
seasons. They become pregnant a second time while they are pregnant,
and produce their young every month. They do not produce their young
continually, but as many days as may be intervene. The female has
milk before the young are produced. As soon as her young are born,
she copulates again and conceives while giving milk. The milk is as
thick as that of the sow. The young are born blind, like those of many
animals with divided feet.


CHAPTER XXIX.

1. The fox copulates, mounting on the back of the female. The young are
born blind, like those of the bear, and are even more inarticulate.
When the season of parturition approaches, the female goes apart, so
that it is rare to take a pregnant fox. When the young are born, the
dam licks them, in order to warm and mature them. She never produces
more than four.

2. The periods of gestation and parturition, both in point of time and
the number of the young, are the same in the wolf as in the dog, and
the young are blind, like those of the dog. They copulate at one season
of the year, and the young are produced in the beginning of summer.
A fabulous story is told of their parturition; for they say that all
the she wolves produce their young in twelve days in the year; and the
reason which is given for this fable is this, that during this number
of days Latona was brought from the Hyperborean regions to Delos, in
the form of a wolf, for fear of Juno. Whether this is or is not the
period of parturition has never yet been ascertained. At present it
only rests upon tradition. It does not appear to be true, nor that
other tale which says that wolves only produce once in their life.

3. Cats and ichneumons produce their young in the same manner as dogs,
and live upon the same things. They live about six years. The young of
the panther are born blind. They are never more than four in number.
The jackal is impregnated like a bitch, and the young are born blind.
They produce two, or three, or four. Its length towards the tail is
great. Its height is small. It runs very swiftly, although its legs
are short; but on account of the softness of its tissues it can leap a
great distance.

4. In Syria there are animals called hemioni which are different from
those derived from a mixture of the horse and ass, though they resemble
them in appearance. As the wild ass is named from its resemblance to
the domestic kind, the wild asses and the hemioni differ from the
domestic race in speed. These hemioni are derived from their own
congeners, of which this is a proof. For some came to Phrygia in the
time of Pharnaces, the father of Pharnabazus, and remain there still.
There are now only three, though they say that at first there were nine.


CHAPTER XXX.

1. The reproduction of mice is more wonderful than that of any other
animal, both in number and rapidity. For a pregnant female was left in
a vessel of corn; and after a short time the vessel was opened, and a
hundred and twenty mice were counted. There is a doubt respecting the
reproduction and destruction of the mice which live on the ground; for
such an inexpressible number of field mice have sometimes made their
appearance that very little food remained. Their power of destruction
also is so great that some small farmers, having on one day observed
that their corn was ready for harvest, when they went the following day
to cut their corn, found it all eaten.

2. The manner of their disappearance also is unaccountable; for in
a few days they all vanish, although beforehand they could not be
exterminated by smoking and digging them out, nor by hunting them and
turning swine among them to root up their runs. Foxes also hunt them
out, and wild weasels[213] are very ready to destroy them; but they
cannot prevail over their numbers and the rapidity of their increase,
nor indeed can anything prevail over them but rain, and when this comes
they disappear very soon.

[213] Perhaps ferret, Mustela varo, or weasel.

3. In a certain part of Persia the female fœtus of the mice are found
to be pregnant in the uterus of their parent. Some people say and
affirm that if they lick salt they become pregnant without copulation.
The Egyptian mice have hair nearly resembling that of the hedgehog.
There are other kinds which go upon two feet, for their fore feet are
small and their hind feet large.[214] They are very numerous. There are
also many other kinds of mice.

[214] Serboa, Dipus gerbillus, or D. jaculus.




BOOK THE SEVENTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. The circumstances attending on the growth of man, from his
conception in the womb even to old age, derived from his peculiar
nature, are after this manner. We have already treated of the
distinctions of the male and female and their parts. The male begins
to have semen at about the age of fourteen complete. At the same time
hair begins to appear on the pubes. As Alcmæon of Crotona says that
flowers blossom before they bear seed, about the same period the voice
begins to become more harsh and irregular. It is neither quite harsh,
nor deep, nor all alike, but it resembles a discordant and harsh
instrument. This is called τραγίζειν, to have a voice like a goat.

2. This is more conspicuous in those who attempt the gratification of
sexual desires; for those who are vehement in these desires rapidly
pass into a man's voice. In those that refrain themselves the contrary
occurs. In those who, like some singers, endeavour to avoid this
change, the voice will continue for a long while, and never undergo any
great change. The breasts also and pudendum not only increase in size,
but their general appearance is changed. At this period of life, if a
person is urged to the emission of semen, the discharge is accompanied
with pain as well as pleasure.

3. About the same period also the breasts of females enlarge, and the
catamenia make their appearance. They resemble the blood of a newly
killed animal. In young girls only do they appear white, especially
if they make use of fluid food. This complaint stops the growth and
weakens the body of girls. The catamenia usually appear when the mammæ
are about two fingers high. The voice of girls also becomes deeper at
this period, for on the whole the voice of women is more acute than
that of men, and the voice of girls than that of old women, as the
voice of boys is more acute than the voice of men. The voice of female
children also is more acute than that of males, and the windpipe is
more acute in girls than boys.

4. They also want especial care at this period, for their sexual
desires are very strong at the commencement, so that if they now take
care to avoid every excitement, except such as the change of their body
requires, without using venery, they generally remain temperate in
after-years. For girls who indulge in venery when young, generally grow
up intemperate; and so do males if they are unguarded either one way or
both ways; for at this age the ducts open and afford an easy passage
for the fluid through the body, and at the same time the memory of past
pleasures causes a desire for present gratification.

5. Some men never have hair on the pubes from their birth, nor seed,
on account of the destruction of the parts appropriated to the semen.
There are some women also who never have hair on the pubes. The male
and female also change their habits of sickness and of health, and the
proportions of their body, whether slight or stout, or of a good habit.
Some thin boys after they attain puberty become stout and healthy, in
others the contrary takes place. This is the case also with females;
for whether boys or girls have their bodies loaded with excrementitious
matter, this is separated in the one by puberty, in the other by the
catamenia. They become more healthy and thriving when that which had
prevented health and growth is removed.

6. Those which are of the contrary habit of body become more thin and
delicate; for their naturally healthy condition is separated in the
puberty of one sex, and the catamenia of the other. There is also
considerable variety in the bosoms of young girls, for in some they are
very large, in others small. This generally takes place in those girls
which have much superfluous humour, for when the catamenia are about to
appear, but before they arrive, the more fluid the patient is, the more
necessary it is that the breasts should increase until the catamenia
make their appearance, and the breasts, which then begin to increase,
remain so afterwards. In youths and aged men the breasts are more
conspicuous, and more like those of females; and in those who are of a
soft habit of body, and are smooth and not full of veins, and in dark
persons also more than fair ones.

7. Until twenty-one years of age the semen is unproductive, afterwards
it becomes fertile, though boys and girls produce small and imperfect
children: this is also the case with other animals. Young girls
conceive more readily, but after conception suffer more in parturition,
and their bodies frequently become imperfect. Men of violent passions,
and women that have borne many children, grow old more rapidly than
others; nor does there appear to be any increase after they have borne
three children. Women of violent sexual desires become more temperate
after they have borne several children.

8. Women who have attained thrice seven years are well adapted for
child-bearing, and men also are capable of becoming parents. Thin
seminal fluid is barren. That which is lumpy begets males; what is thin
and not clotted, females. The beard also appears on the chin of men at
the same period.


CHAPTER II.

1. The catamenia appear when the moon is on the wane, from which some
persons would argue that the moon is a female, for the purification of
women and the waning of the moon occur together, and repletion occurs
again in both after the purification and waning. In few women the
catamenia occur every month, but in most at every third month. Those in
whom they continue for only two or three days escape with ease: it is
more difficult for those in whom it continues for a longer time, for
they suffer during the whole period. In some the purification takes
place all at once, in others by degrees; in all, however, the pain
is considerable as long as they are present. In many women, when the
catamenia are nearly ready to appear, the womb suffers so much from
strangulation and disturbance, until they are discharged.

2. Conception naturally takes place immediately after this discharge
in women, and those who do not then conceive, are usually barren. Some
women, however, who have never menstruated, conceive. Such persons
contain in themselves as much of the fluid as is usually left behind
after the purification, but not so much as to make its appearance
externally. Some women in whom the uterus has closed immediately after
the purification, conceive even while menstruating, but do not conceive
afterwards. The catamenia sometimes occur even in pregnant women. Such
women usually bear imperfect children, and their offspring either do
not grow up, or are weakly.

3. It frequently happens that from the want of sexual intercourse, or
from youth and the period of life, or from long abstinence, the uterus
descends, and the catamenia occur several times in the month, until
they conceive; after which the parts return to their proper place: and
sometimes even in women with a good habit of body, if the humours are
abundant, an effusion of the semen takes place if it is too moist.

4. It has already been observed that this purification is more abundant
in women than in any other creature. In animals that are not viviparous
no symptoms of anything of the kind occur, for this superfluous matter
is returned into their own body, for in many the females are superior
to the males in size, and in many it is turned to the formation of
plates, or scales, or abundance of feathers. In viviparous animals
with feet, it is turned to the formation of hair and bulk of body (for
man is the only animal that is smooth), or of urine; for in almost
all animals this secretion is thick and abundant. In women, on the
contrary, all the superfluous matter of the body is directed to this
purification.

5. The case of the male is the same, for in proportion to his size,
man emits more semen than other animals; (wherefore, also, man is the
smoothest of all animals,) and among men those which abound in humours,
and are not very full fleshed, and fair men more than dark ones. So
also among women. For in those that are full fleshed, the greater part
of the secretion goes to the supply of the body, and in the act of
sexual intercourse, fair women have naturally more seminal fluid than
dark ones. Liquid and acid foods also increase this kind of intercourse.


CHAPTER III.

1. It is a sign that women have conceived when the pudendum remains dry
after coition. If the labia are smooth they will not conceive, for
it slips out; nor will they if the labia are thick: but if there is a
sensation of roughness and resistance when touched with the finger, and
the labia are thin, they are then adapted for conception. In order that
they may be able to conceive, such women must prepare the uterus, and
the contrary that they may not conceive; for if the labia are smooth
they do not conceive: so that some women, in order that the semen may
fall outside the uterus, anoint themselves with oil of cedar, or with
ceruse, or oil mixed with frankincense.

2. If it remain seven days, it is evident that conception has taken
place, for in this period what are called the outpourings take place.
The purification takes place in many women after conception. Thirty
days afterwards in the case of conceiving a female child, and forty in
the case of a male. After parturition, also, the purification lasts a
similar number of days, though it is not exactly the same in all.

3. In the same number of days after conception the discharge no longer
takes its usual course, but is turned towards the mammæ, in which
the milk begins to make its appearance. At first the milk appears
very small, and like a web in the mammæ. After conception, the first
sensation generally takes place in the iliac region, which immediately
appears more full in some persons. This is more conspicuous in slight
persons. If the child is a male, a movement is usually felt on the
right side of the groin, in about forty days; if a female, the movement
occurs on the left side, in about ninety days. We must not suppose,
however, that an accurate judgment can be formed in this way, for it
often happens that the movement is felt on the right side when a female
child, and on the left when a male child is conceived. All these, and
such like things, vary in a greater or less degree.

4. About this period, also, the fœtus becomes divided; it previously
existed as an undivided mass of flesh. If it perishes within seven
days, it is called an effluxion; if in forty days, an abortion. The
fœtus often perishes within this period. If the male fœtus is excluded
within forty days, and is put out into any other fluid, it becomes
dissolved, and disappears. If placed in cold water, it becomes, as it
were, surrounded with a membrane. When this is taken off, the fœtus
appears about as large as a large ant. Its parts are visible, both
those of generation, and all the rest; and the eyes are very large, as
in other animals. If the female fœtus perishes within the three months,
it generally appears without divisions. If it survives to the fourth
month, the parts appear formed.

5. The whole completion of the parts is more slow in the female than
in the male, and parturition is more frequently delayed to the tenth
month. After birth, females attain to youth, and puberty, and old age,
more rapidly than males, and those that have borne many children more
rapidly than others, as it was observed before.


CHAPTER IV.

1. When conception has taken place, the uterus usually closes
immediately for seven months. In the eighth month it opens, and the
fœtus, if properly developed, begins to descend in the eighth month. If
the fœtus is not properly developed, but checked in the eighth month in
parturition, women who bear in the eighth month do not exclude it, nor
does the fœtus advance downwards in the eighth month, and the uterus
does not open itself. It is a sign that it is not properly developed,
when it is born before the circumstances I have described take place.

2. After conception, women suffer throughout their whole body, and
their sight becomes dim, and they are afflicted with headache. In some,
these symptoms occur very soon, as early as the tenth day; in others
they are delayed, in proportion as they have an abundance or deficiency
of superfluous matter in their bodies. Nausea and vomiting often seize
upon them, and on those especially in whom the purifications become
stagnant, and do not yet fly to the mammæ. Some women suffer at the
commencement of pregnancy, and others in the more advanced stages, when
the fœtus begins to grow. Retention of urine also frequently attacks
them at last.

3. Those that are pregnant with a male fœtus, usually pass through
the time more easily, and retain a better colour throughout. If a
female is conceived, the contrary is the case; for they are generally
more discoloured, and suffer more during the period of gestation.
In many cases the legs swell, and a swollen condition of the flesh
is also common. In some women, however, the condition is contrary.
Pregnant women are apt to have all sorts of fancies, which change very
rapidly. Some persons call this longing. These fancies are strongest
when a female is conceived, and there is but little pleasure in their
gratification. In a few women the condition of the body is better
during pregnancy; they suffer most when the hair of the fœtus begins to
grow. Pregnant women lose the hair which grows on the parts that are
hairy at birth, while it becomes more thick upon the parts on which it
appears subsequent to birth.

4. A male fœtus usually moves more freely in the womb than a female,
and the parturition is not so long. If a female, the parturition is
slower. The pain in the birth of female children is continuous, and
dull; in the birth of males it is sharp, and far more severe. Those
who, before parturition, have sexual intercourse, suffer less in the
process. Sometimes women seem to suffer, not from any pain of their
own, but from the turning of the head of the child; and this appears
to be the commencement of the pain. Other animals have a single exact
period for parturition, for one time is appointed for them all. The
human subject alone varies in this particular, for the period of
gestation is seven, eight, or nine months, or ten at the outside,
though some have even advanced as far as the eleventh month.

5. If any are born before the seventh month, they never live. Those of
seven months are the first that are developed, but these are usually
weakly, wherefore, also, they wrap them in wool. Many of these infants
have the passages, as the ears and nostrils, imperforate. As they
grow, however, they assume a proper form, and many of them survive. In
Egypt, and some other places, where the women suffer little pain in
parturition, and where they bear many children with ease, those even
at the end of eight months are capable of living, even although they
should be monstrous; but in such places children born in the eighth
month may survive and be brought up. In Greece, however, few of them
survive, and most of them perish; and people suspect that if any of
them survive, the exact period of conception must have been mistaken by
the mother.

6. Women suffer most in the fourth and eighth month, and if the fœtus
dies in the fourth or eighth month, they usually die also; so that not
only children born in the eighth month often perish, but their mothers
also perish with them. In the same way, the period of conception
probably is mistaken by those who have been pregnant more than eleven
months; for in these cases the beginning of the conception escapes the
notice of females, for frequently after the uterus has been distended
with flatulence, women have copulated and conceived, and supposed that
the former condition in which they observed the usual symptoms, was the
commencement of gestation.


CHAPTER V.

1. The human subject also differs from other animals, as to the number
of the perfect offspring produced at a birth. For the human subject
differs both from animals which produce but one, and those which
produce many; for, generally speaking, and, in most cases, women have
but one child at a time, though cases of twins occur frequently, and
in many places, as in Egypt, three or four at a birth have been known
in some particular places, as I have observed before. Five at a birth
are the most that have been produced. This has been observed to take
place in many cases, but in one case only have twenty been produced
at four births, for five were born each time, and many of them were
reared. In other animals, if the twins are male and female, there is
no more difficulty in rearing and preserving them, than if they were
both of the same sex. In the human subject there are few cases of twins
surviving, when one was male and the other female.

2. The human female and the mare copulate after conception more than
any other creatures, for all other females, when they have conceived,
fly from the males, except those which, like the hare, become pregnant
a second time during gestation. But the mare, having once conceived,
does not form a second fœtus, but generally produces a single foal. In
the human subject it happens sometimes, though rarely. Those which are
conceived a long while afterwards never come to perfection, but, from
the pain which they cause, destroy the original fœtus; and a case has
occurred in which twelve imperfect embryos have been produced at one
time. If the second conception take place soon after the first, they
bear and produce the fœtus, as if it were a twin. This, they say, was
the case with Iphicles and Hercules.

3. The possibility of the case is manifest, for an adulteress has
been known to produce one child like her husband, and another like
her paramour; and a case has occurred of a woman having conceived
twins, and then conceived a third child upon them; and when the proper
time came, the twins were born perfect, the other was only a fœtus of
five months old, which died immediately: and in another case, a woman
produced, first of all, a fœtus of seven months old, and then twins,
perfectly developed; the former perished, but the latter survived. And
some women have conceived at the same time as they miscarried, and
have ejected one fœtus while they bore the other. In most females, who
have cohabited after the eighth month after conception, the child has
been born filled with a shining mucous-like substance, and has often
appeared full of the food which has been eaten by the mother; and if
she has fed upon food more than usually salt, the child has been born
without nails.


CHAPTER VI.

1. The milk that is produced before the seventh month is useless; but
as soon as the child is alive the milk becomes good. At first it is
salt, like that of sheep. Most women during pregnancy are affected by
wine, and if they drink it they become faint and feeble. The beginning
and the ending of the reproductive power in both sexes is marked in
the male by the emission of the semen, in the female by the catamenia.
They are not, however, fertile when these first occur, nor while they
are still small and weak. The period of the commencement of these signs
has been mentioned. In women the catamenia usually cease at forty; but
if they pass over this age, they go on to fifty; and some have even
produced children at that period, but none later than this period.

2. The reproductive function in men usually continues active till
they are sixty years old; if they pass beyond this period, till they
are seventy; and some men have had children at seventy years old. It
frequently happens that, when marriages are unfruitful, both men and
women become pregnant, if the marriage is dissolved and they marry
again. The same thing takes place respecting the birth of male and
female children. For sometimes only children of one sex are produced
by a marriage; and if this is dissolved, and the parents marry again,
children of the other sex are produced. These things also vary with the
age of the parents; for some when young have female children, and when
older males, though the contrary sometimes takes place.

3. The same is the case with the whole of the reproductive function.
For some persons have no children when they are young, but have them
afterwards; others have children at first, but none afterwards; and
there are some women who conceive with difficulty, but when they have
conceived bear children; others conceive easily, but the fœtus never
comes to maturity. There are also both men and women who only produce
children of one sex, as the story goes of Hercules, who had but one
daughter in seventy-two children. Those who have been barren, and
either after great care, or from any other cause, at last conceive,
more frequently bear a daughter than a son. It often happens also that
men who have engendered become impotent, and subsequently return to
their former condition.

4. Maimed parents produce maimed children; and so also lame and blind
parents produce lame and blind children; and, on the whole, children
are often born with anything contrary to nature, or any mark which
their parents may have, such as tumours and wounds. Such marks have
often been handed down for three generations; as if a person had a mark
on their arm which was not seen in the son, but the grandson exhibited
a dark confused spot on the same place. The circumstances, however, are
rare; and sound children are generally produced from lame parents; nor
is there any complete certainty in these matters; and children resemble
their parents or their grandparents, and sometimes they resemble
neither. This is handed down for many generations; as in Sicily, a
woman cohabited with an Ethiopian, her daughter was not black, but her
daughter's child was so.

5. For the most part the girls resemble their mother, and the boys
their father; though the contrary is often the case, and the females
resemble their father, and the males their mother, and the different
parts of the body resemble either parents. Twins have sometimes no
resemblance to each other, but they are generally much alike; and one
woman cohabited with a man, and conceived seven days after parturition,
when she bore a child as like her former as if they had been twins.
Some women, as well as other creatures, produce young resembling
themselves, others bear those which resemble the male, as the horse
called Dicæa in Pharsalia.


CHAPTER VII.

1. The seminal fluid in its emission is preceded by wind. The manner of
its emission exhibits this; for nothing is expelled to a great distance
without pneumatic force. If the seminal fluid is taken up by the
uterus and retained there, it becomes inclosed in a membrane. For if
it is expelled before it becomes articulated, it appears like an ovum
inclosed in a membrane, but without any shell, and the membrane is full
of veins. All animals, whether furnished with fins, feet, or wings,
whether viviparous or oviparous, are produced in the same manner,
except that the umbilicus in viviparous animals is turned towards the
uterus, and in others to the ovum; and in some cases both ways, as in
a certain kind of fish. Some of them are surrounded by a membrane,
others by a chorion. First of all, the fœtus is contained within the
last envelope. Then there is another membrane over this, which is in
part united to the matrix and is partly separate, and contains water.
Between these is a watery or sanguineous fluid, which in women is
called prophorus.

2. All animals that have a navel increase by the navel; and in those
which have acetabula the navel is united to the acetabulum; and in
those which have a smooth uterus the navel is united to the uterus upon
a vein. The position of all quadrupeds in the uterus is stretched out;
that of fishes is on the side; bipeds, as birds, are folded together.
The human fœtus lies folded up with its nose between its knees and its
eyes upon them, and its ears turned outwards. All animals are alike
in having the head placed upwards at first. As they grow, the head
turns round, and the birth of all animals is naturally with the head
forwards: for even in those that are folded together the presentation
of the feet is unnatural. The embryo of quadrupeds contains
excrementitious matter, as soon as it is matured, both fluid and
solid. The latter is contained in the extreme parts of the intestine,
the former in the bladder.

3. If animals have acetabula in the uterus, these acetabula always
become smaller as the fœtus grows, and at last disappear. The umbilical
cord is a covering for veins, of which the origin is in the uterus.
In those creatures which have acetabula it originates in them; in
those that have not acetabula it originates in the vein. In the larger
animals, such as the fœtus of oxen, there are four veins; in smaller
animals, two; in very small animals, as in birds, there is but one.
Two veins reach the fœtus through the liver, from that part called the
gates of the liver, towards the great vein; and two go to the aorta,
where it is divided into two parts; and there are membranes round each
pair of veins, and the umbilical cord surrounds these membranes like a
covering. As the fœtus increases, these veins diminish. The embryo, as
it grows, advances into the viscera, where its movements are manifest.
Sometimes it remains rolled up near the pudendum.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. When the pains of parturition come on, they extend to many and
various parts of the body, but especially to one or other of the
thighs. Those who suffer most in the bowels are delivered most rapidly;
those who suffer much in the loins are delivered with difficulty; those
whose pain lies in the subumbilical region, more quickly. If the child
is a male, a liquid, serum-like discharge, of a pale yellow colour,
precedes; if a female, this discharge is sanguineous, but still fluid.
Some women have neither during the period of parturition.

2. In other animals parturition is not painful, and it is evident that
they suffer but moderately in the pains of labour. In women the pains
of parturition are more violent, especially in those that are inactive
or that are not well made in their sides, and are unable to hold their
breath. They also suffer more in parturition, if they breathe in the
meantime, compelled by the necessity of respiration. At first a fluid
escapes when the fœtus comes to the birth, and the membranes are
ruptured; after this, the embryo is excluded, the uterus being turned,
and the uterus being turned inside-out.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The division of the umbilical cord often requires the careful
attention of the midwife; for by skilfulness she may not only assist in
difficult labours, but should attend carefully to the circumstances,
and apply the ligature to the umbilical cord of the child; for if the
secundines fall out with the child, the umbilical cord must be bound
with a ligature of worsted, and cut above the ligature, and where it is
bound it joins together, and that which is joined with it falls off. If
the ligature becomes loose, the child dies from loss of blood. If the
secundines do not come out at once, while they remain within, and the
child is outside, the umbilical cord must be tied and divided.

2. Frequently the child, if weak, has appeared as if born dead, until
the umbilical cord was tied, for the blood flowed from the child to
the navel and the surrounding parts; but some skilful midwife being
present, by pressure on the navel from within has revived the child,
just as if it had been filled with blood from the first. It has been
already observed, that all animals are naturally born with the head
forwards. Children also have their hands pressed down against their
sides. As soon as they are born they begin to cry and bring their
hands to their mouth. They emit excrements, some immediately, others
very soon, but all in the course of a day. This excrementitious matter
is very abundant, considering the size of the child. Women call it
the meconium. Its colour is like that of blood, and it is black and
pitch-like. Afterwards it becomes milky, for the child immediately
draws the breast. The child never cries before it is entirely in the
world, not even though its head is protruded in difficult cases, while
the body is within the uterus.

3. Those women in whom a flooding has preceded the period of delivery
are delivered with more difficulty, and if the purifications are
small after parturition, and only as much as they are at first, and
do not continue for more than forty days, such women are stronger,
and more ready for conception. After children are born, for forty
days they neither laugh nor weep when awake, but sometimes do both
in their sleep; nor do they usually feel when they are tickled, but
they sleep the greater part of their time. As they grow, the period of
wakefulness continually increases; and it is evident that they dream,
but it is some time before they remember their imaginations. There is
no difference in the bones of other animals, but they are all born
perfect. In children the bone called bregma is soft, and does not
become strong for some time. Some animals are born with teeth, but
children begin to cut their teeth in the seventh month. The front teeth
naturally appear first, sometimes the upper teeth and sometimes the
under. Children cut their teeth more easily if their nurses have warmer
milk.


CHAPTER X.

After parturition and purification women become full of milk; and in
some it not only flows through the nipples but through other parts of
the breast, and sometimes from the cheeks; and if this fluid is not
matured nor secreted, but remains full, hard knots are formed, which
remain for a long time; for every part of the breast is so spongy that,
if a hair is swallowed with the drink, pain ensues in the breasts,
until it either escapes spontaneously with the milk, or is sucked out,
this is called τριχιᾷν. They continue to have milk until they conceive
again. It then ceases, and is quenched in other creatures as well as
in the human subject. The catamenia seldom take place while milk is
secreted, though this sometimes occurs in women while nursing. On the
whole, an effusion of fluid seldom takes place from many parts of the
body at the same time, and those that have hæmorrhoids have usually
less purification. In some it takes place through ixiæ (varices), and
is secreted from the loins before it reaches the uterus; and those who
vomit blood when the purification is suppressed suffer no harm.


CHAPTER XI.

Children are very subject to spasms, and especially those that are in
a good condition and have abundance of rich milk, or whose nurses are
fat. Wine is injurious in this complaint, and dark-coloured wines more
so than those that are pale, and food that is not fluid, and windy
aliments, and stoppage in the bowels. Children with this complaint
generally die before the seventh day: wherefore also this day has
received a name, as if it gave some hope of the recovery of the child.
Children suffer most at the full moon. Children are in great danger
when the spasms originate in the back, especially if they are advancing
in age.[215]

[215] The seventh book ends very abruptly, and hence it has been
thought that what is now called the tenth book, in which the subject
of reproduction is continued, would have its proper place here, as a
continuation of the seventh. Whether a portion of the genuine work
of Aristotle has been lost which would have completed the subject is
another question; but there can be little doubt that the tenth book,
in the form in which we have it, is no genuine work of Aristotle; some
of the opinions are contrary to those which he has expressed, and the
whole style and language is different from that of Aristotle. Schneider
therefore has placed the tenth book at the end of the work, that he may
neither entirely exclude that which in former times was considered a
portion of Aristotle's treatise on Animals, nor yet allow a fictitious
book to interrupt the genuine writings of his Author.




BOOK THE EIGHTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. The nature of animals and their mode of reproduction has now been
described. Their actions and mode of life also differ according to
their disposition and their food. For almost all animals present
traces of their moral dispositions, though these distinctions are most
remarkable in man. For most of them, as we remarked, when speaking
of their various parts, appear to exhibit gentleness or ferocity,
mildness or cruelty, courage or cowardice, fear or boldness, violence
or cunning; and many of them exhibit something like a rational
consciousness, as we remarked in speaking of their parts. For they
differ from man, and man from the other animals, in a greater or less
degree; for some of these traits are exhibited strongly in man, and
others in other animals.

2. Others differ in proportion. For as men exhibit art, wisdom, and
intelligence, animals possess, by way of compensation, some other
physical power. This is most conspicuous in the examination of infants,
for in them we see, as it were, the vestiges and seeds of their future
disposition; nor does their soul at this period differ in any respect
from that of an animal; so that it is not unreasonable for animals
to present the same, or similar, or analogous appearances. Nature
passes so gradually from inanimate to animate things, that from their
continuity their boundary and the mean between them is indistinct. The
race of plants succeeds immediately that of inanimate objects; and
these differ from each other in the proportion of life in which they
participate; for, compared with other bodies, plants appear to possess
life, though, when compared with animals, they appear inanimate.

3. The change from plants to animals, however, is gradual, as I before
observed. For a person might question to which of these classes some
marine objects belong; for many of them are attached to the rock, and
perish as soon as they are separated from it. The pinnæ are attached to
the rocks, the solens cannot live after they are taken away from their
localities; and, on the whole, all the testacea resemble plants, if
we compare them with locomotive animals. Some of them appear to have
no sensation; in others it is very dull. The body of some of them is
naturally fleshy, as of those which are called tethya; and the acalephe
and the sponge entirely resemble plants; the progress is always gradual
by which one appears to have more life and motion than another.

4. In the vital actions also we may observe the same manner. For
vegetables which are produced from seed appear to have no other work
beyond reproduction; nor do some animals appear to have any other
object in their existence. This object then is common to them all; but
as sensation advances, their manner of life differs in their having
pleasure in sexual intercourse, in their mode of parturition and
rearing their young. Some of them, like plants, simply accomplish their
peculiar mode of reproduction at an appointed season, and others are
diligent in rearing their young; but as soon as this is accomplished
they separate from them, and have no farther communication; but those
that are more intelligent, and possess more memory, use their offspring
in a more civilized manner.

5. The work of reproduction is one part of their life, the work of
procuring food forms another. These two occupy their labour and their
life. Their food differs in the substances of which it consists, and
all the natural increase of the body is derived from food. That which
is natural is pleasant, and all animals follow that which is pleasant
to their nature.


CHAPTER II.

1. Animals are divided according to the localities which they inhabit;
for some animals are terrestrial, others are aquatic. They also admit
of a ternary division, those that breathe air and those that breathe
water, one of these classes is terrestrial, the other is aquatic; the
third class does not breathe either air or water, but they are adapted
by nature to receive refreshment from each of these elements; and some
of these are called terrestrial, others are aquatic, though they
neither breathe air or water; and there are other animals which procure
their food and make their abode in either of these elements. For many
that breathe air, and produce their young upon the land, procure their
food from the water, where they generally make their abode; and these
are the only animals which appear to be doubtful, for they may be
arranged either as terrestrial or aquatic animals.

2. Of those that breathe water, none have feet or wings, nor seek their
food on land; but many of those that are terrestrial, and breathe
air, do so; some of them so much so, that they cannot live when
separated from the water, as those which are called marine turtles,
and crocodiles, and hippopotami, and seals, and some of the smaller
creatures, as the water tortoise and the frog tribe; for all these are
suffocated if their respiration is suspended for any length of time.
They produce their young and rear them on dry land; others do so near
the dry land, while they reside in the water.

3. Of all animals the most remarkable in this particular is the
dolphin, and some other aquatic animals and cetacea which are of this
habit, as the whale and others which have a blowhole; for it is not
easy to arrange them either with aquatic or terrestrial animals, if
we consider animals that breathe air as terrestrial, and those that
breathe water as aquatics, for they partake of the characters of
both classes; for they receive the sea and eject it through their
blowhole, and air through their lungs, for they have this part, and
breathe through it. And the dolphin, when captured in nets, is often
suffocated, from the impossibility of breathing. It will live for a
long while out of water, snoring and groaning like other breathing
animals. It sleeps with its snout above the water, in order that it may
breathe through it.

4. It is thus impossible to arrange it under both of these contrary
divisions, but it would appear that the aquatic animals must be further
subdivided; for they breathe and eject water for the same reason as
others breathe air, for the sake of coolness. Other animals do this
for the sake of food; for those animals which obtain their food in the
water, must also, at the same time, swallow some of the fluid, and have
an organ by which they can eject it. Those creatures which use water
instead of air for breathing have gills; those that use it for food
have a blowhole. These creatures are sanguineous. The nature of the
malacia and malacostraca is the same; for these swallow water for food.

5. Those animals which breathe air, but live in the water, and those
which breathe water, and have gills, but go out upon dry land and take
their food there, belong to two divisions of aquatic animals. This last
division is represented by a single animal called the cordylus (water
newt); for this animal has no lungs, but gills; and it goes on dry
land to procure its food. It has four feet, so that it appears natural
that it should walk. In all these animals nature appears to be, as it
were, turned aside, and some of the males appear to be females, and
the females have a male appearance; for animals which have but small
diversity in particular parts, exhibit great variations in the whole
body.

6. This is evident in castrated animals; for if a small portion only of
the body is destroyed, the animal becomes a female; so that it is plain
that if a very minute portion in the original composition of an animal
becomes changed, if that portion belongs to the origin of the species,
it might become either male or female; or, if taken away altogether,
the animal might be neuter. And so, either way, it might become a land
or aquatic animal, if only a small change took place ... it happens
that some become terrestrial and others aquatic animals, and some are
not amphibious which others are, because in their original generation
they received some kind of substance which they use for food. For that
which is natural is agreeable to every animal, as I have said before.


CHAPTER III.

1. When animals are divided in three ways into aquatic and land
animals, because they either breathe air or water, or from the
composition of their bodies; or, in the third place, from their food,
their manner of life will be found to agree with these divisions. For
some follow both the composition of their bodies and the nature of
their food, and their respiration of either water or air. Others only
agree with their composition and food.

2. The testacea which are immoveable live by a fluid which percolates
through the dense parts of the sea, and being digested because it
is lighter than the sea water, thus returns to its original nature.
That this fluid exists in the sea, and is capable of infiltration is
manifest, and may be proved by experiment; for if anyone will make a
thin waxen vessel, and sink it empty in the sea, in a night and a day,
it may be taken up full of water, which is drinkable.

3. The acalephe (actinia) feeds upon any small fish which may fall in
its way. Its mouth is placed in the centre of its body. This organ
is conspicuous in the larger individuals: like the oyster, it has a
passage for the exclusion of its food, which is placed above. The
acalephe appears to resemble the internal part of the oyster, and it
makes use of the rock, as the oyster does of its shell. (The patella
also is free, and wanders about in search of food.)

4. Among the locomotive testacea, some are carnivorous, and live on
small fish, as the purpura, for this creature is carnivorous, it is
therefore caught with a bait of flesh: others live upon marine plants.
The marine turtles live upon shell-fish, for which purpose they have a
very powerful mouth; for if any of them take a stone or anything else,
they break and eat it. This animal leaves the water and eats grass.
They often suffer and perish, when they are dried up as they float on
the surface, for they are not able to dive readily.

5. The malacostraca are of the same nature, for they eat everything;
they feed upon stones and mud, seaweeds and dung, as the rock crabs,
and are also carnivorous. The spiny lobsters also overcome large
fishes, and a kind of retribution awaits them in turn, for the polypus
prevails over the lobster, for they are not inconvenienced by the shell
of the lobster, so that if the lobsters perceive them in the same net
with them, they die from fear. The spiny lobsters overcome the congers,
for their roughness prevents them from falling off. The congers devour
the polypi which cannot adhere to them on account of the smoothness of
their surface; all the malacia are carnivorous.

6. The spiny lobsters also live on small fish, which they hunt for in
their holes, for they are produced in such parts of the sea as are
rough and stony, and in those places make their habitations; whatever
they capture, they bring to their mouth with their double claw, as the
crabs do. When not frightened they naturally walk forwards, hanging
their horns down at their sides. When alarmed they retreat backwards,
and extend their horns to a great distance. They fight with each other
like rams with their horns, raising them and striking each other. They
are often seen in numbers as if they were gregarious.

7. The malacostraca lead this kind of life. Among the malacia the
teuthis and sepia prevail over the large fish. The polypus generally
collects shells which it empties of their contents and feeds upon them,
so that those who seek for them find their holes by the shells that are
scattered about. The report that they eat each other is a mistake; but
some have the tentacula eaten off by the congers.


CHAPTER IV.

1. All fish at the season of oviposition live upon ova; in the rest of
their food they are not all so well agreed, for some of them are only
carnivorous, as the selachos, conger, channa, thynnus, labrax, sinodon,
amia, orphus, and muræna; the trigla lives upon fuci, shell-fish, and
mud; it is also carnivorous. The cephalus lives on mud, the dascillus
on mud and dung. The scarus and melanurus on sea-weed, the salpa on
dung and fuci, it will also eat the plant called horehound; it is the
only fish that can be caught with the gourd.

2. All fish, except the cestreus, eat one another, especially the
congers. The cephalus and the cestreus alone are not carnivorous. This
is a proof of it. They are never captured with anything of the kind in
their stomach, nor are they captured with a bait made of flesh, but
with bread; the cestreus is always fed upon sea-weed and sand. One
kind of cephalus which some persons call chelone lives near the land,
another is called peræas. This last feeds upon nothing but its own
mucus, for which reason it is always very poor. The cephalus lives upon
mud, wherefore they are heavy and slimy. They certainly never eat fish,
on account of their dwelling in mud; they often emerge in order to wash
themselves from the slime. Neither will any creature eat their ova, so
that they increase rapidly, and when they increase they are devoured
by other fish, and especially by the acharnus.

3. The cestreus (mullet) is the most greedy and insatiable of fish, so
that its abdomen is distended, and it is not good for food unless it is
poor. When alarmed it hides its head, as if its whole body were thus
concealed; the sinodon also is carnivorous, and eats the malacia. This
fish and the channa often eject their stomachs as they pursue small
fish, for their stomach is near the mouth, and they have no œsophagus.
Some are simply carnivorous, as the dolphin, sinodon, chrysophrys, the
selache and malacia; others, as the phycis, cobius, and the rock-fish,
principally feed upon mud and fuci, and bryum, and what is called
caulion, and any matter which may be produced in the sea. The phycis
eats no other flesh than that of the shrimps. They also frequently eat
each other, as I before remarked, and the greater devour the less. It
is a proof that they are carnivorous, that they are captured with bait
made of flesh.

4. The amia, tunny, and labrax generally eat flesh, though they also
eat sea-weed. The sargus feeds after the trigla when the last has
buried itself in the mud and departed, for it has the power of burying
itself, then the sargus comes and feeds and prevents all those that are
weaker than itself from approaching. The fish called scarus is the only
one which appears to ruminate like quadrupeds. Other fish appear to
hunt the smaller ones with their mouths towards them, in this way they
naturally swim; but the selachea, dolphins and cetacea throw themselves
on their back to capture their prey, for their mouth is placed below
them, for this reason the smaller ones escape, or if not they would
soon be reduced in number; for the swiftness of the dolphin and its
capacity for food appear incredible.

5. A few eels in some places are fed upon mud, and any kind of food
which may be cast into the water, but generally they live upon fresh
water, and those who rear eels take care that the water which flows off
and on upon the shallows in which they live may be clear, where they
make the eel preserves. For they are soon suffocated if the water is
not clean, their gills being very small. For this reason those who seek
for them disturb the water. In the Strymon they are taken about the
time of the rising of the Pleiades. For the water is disturbed at this
season by the mud which is stirred up by contrary winds, otherwise it
is useless to attempt to obtain them. When dead, eels do not rise and
float on the surface, like other fishes, for their stomach is small; a
few of them are fat, but this is not usually the case.

6. When taken out of the water, they will live five or six days; if
the wind is in the north they will live longer than if it is in the
south. If they are removed from the ponds to the eel preserves during
the summer they perish, but not if removed in the winter; neither will
they bear violent changes, for if they are taken and plunged into cold
water, they often perish in great numbers. They are suffocated also if
kept in a small quantity of water. This takes place also in other fish,
which are suffocated if kept in a small quantity of water which is
never changed, like animals which breathe air when enclosed in a small
quantity of air. Some eels live seven or eight years. Fresh-water fish
make use of food, and devour each other, as well as plants and roots,
or anything else that they can find in the mud; they generally feed in
the night, and during the day dwell in deep holes. This is the nature
of the food of fish.


CHAPTER V.

1. All birds with crooked claws are carnivorous, nor are they able to
eat corn even when put in their mouths. All the eagles belong to this
class and the kites, and both the hawks, the pigeon hawk namely, and
the sparrow hawk. These differ in size from each other, and so does the
triorches. This bird is as large as the kite, and is visible at all
seasons of the year; the osprey and vulture also belong to this class.
The osprey is as large as the eagle, and ash-coloured. There are two
kinds of vultures, one small and whitish, the other large and cinereous.

2. Some of the night birds also have crooked claws, as the nycticorax,
owl, and bryas. The bryas resembles an owl in appearance, but it is as
large as an eagle; the eleos, ægolius, and scops also belong to this
class. The eleos is larger than a domestic fowl, the ægolius is about
the size of that bird, they both hunt the jay. The scops is less than
the owl; all three of these are similar in form, and carnivorous. Some
that have not crooked claws are carnivorous, as the swallow.

3. Some birds feed on worms, as the finch, the sparrow, batis,
chloris, titmouse. There are three kinds of titmouse; the spizites
is the largest, it is as large as the finch. Another is called the
orinus, because it dwells in mountains; it has a large tail. The third
resembles them in everything except its size, for it is very small.
The sycalis also, the megalocoryphus, pyrrhulas, erithacus, hypolaïs,
œstrus, tyrannis are of this class. The last of these is the least,
it is not much larger than a locust; it has a purple crest, and is
altogether a graceful and well-formed bird. The bird called anthus
also, which is of the size of the finch; the orospizus is like the
finch, and nearly of the same size, it has a blue stripe on its neck,
and lives in mountainous places. The wren also lives upon seeds. All
these and such like birds either partly or entirely live on worms.

4. These birds, the acanthis, thraupis, and that which is called
chrysometris, all live upon thorns, but neither eat worms or any other
living creature, and they both roost and feed in the same places.
There are others which feed on gnats; these live chiefly by hunting
for these insects, as the greater and lesser pipo, both of which are
by some persons called woodpeckers. They resemble each other in their
cry, though that of the larger bird is the louder, and they both feed
by flying against trees. The celeos also, which is as large as a turtle
dove, and entirely yellow; its habit is to strike against trees; it
generally lives upon trees, and has a loud voice. This bird generally
inhabits the Peloponnesus. There is also another called cnipologus,
which is small, about the size of the acanthyllis; its colour is
cinereous and spotted, and its voice is weak; this bird also pecks
trees.

5. There are other birds which live upon fruit and grasses, as the
phaps, phatta, peristera, œnas, and trygon.[216] The phatta and
peristera are always present, the trygon only in summer time; in the
winter it is not seen, for it hides itself in holes. The œnas is
generally seen and captured in the autumn. The œnas is as large as the
peristera but less than the phaps. It is generally captured as it is
drinking; it comes to this country when it has young. All the rest come
in the summer, and make their nests here, and all, except the pigeon
tribe, live upon animal food.

[216] Different species of pigeons and doves.

6. All birds, as far as food is concerned, are either terrestrial or
live in the neighbourhood of rivers and ponds, or near the sea. Those
that have webbed feet pass the greater part of their time on the water;
those with divided feet near the water. Some of these dive for their
food, such as live upon plants and do not eat flesh; others, as the
heron and white heron, live in ponds and rivers. The latter of these is
smaller than the former, and has a flat large bill.

7. The pelargus also, and the gull, the latter is ash-coloured, and the
schœnilus, cinclos, pygargus, (and tryngas) this last is the largest of
these small birds, for it is of the same size as the thrush; all these
birds wag their tails. The calidris also, this bird is variegated and
ash-coloured. The kingfisher also lives near the water; there appear to
be two kinds of this bird, one of which utters its cry as it sits upon
the reeds, and the other, which is larger, is silent; they both have
a blue back. The trochilus also, and the kingfisher and cerylus also
live near the sea. The corona also lives upon animals which are cast on
shore, for it is omnivorous. The white gull also, the cepphus, æthyia,
and charadrius.

8. The heavier web-footed birds inhabit the neighbourhood of rivers and
ponds, as the swan, duck, phalaris, columbis, and the boscas, which
is like a duck, but smaller; and the bird called corax, which is as
large as the pelargus, but its legs are shorter, it is web-footed and
a swimmer, its colour is black; this last bird perches upon trees, and
is the only one of this class that builds its nest in such places. The
great and small goose also, the latter is gregarious, and chenalopex,
the aix, and the penelops. The sea eagle also lives near the sea, and
fishes in the waters of lakes. Many birds are omnivorous; those with
crooked claws seize upon other animals which they can overcome, and
upon birds. They do not, however, devour their own congeners, as fish
frequently do; all the tribes of birds drink very little, those with
crooked claws do not drink at all, or only a few of them, and these but
seldom; of these the cenchris drinks the most; the kite rarely drinks,
though it has been observed to do so.


CHAPTER VI.

1. Animals covered with scaly plates, as the lizard and other
quadrupeds and serpents, are omnivorous, for they eat both flesh and
grass, and serpents lick their prey more than any other animal; all
these creatures, and indeed all with spongy lungs, drink very little,
and all that are oviparous are of this kind, and have but little blood.
Serpents are all very fond of wine, so that they hunt the viper by
placing vessels of wine in the hedge-rows, and they are captured when
intoxicated. Serpents devour any animal that they may have captured,
and when they have sucked out the juice, they reject all the remainder;
nearly all such animals do this, as also the spiders. But the spiders
suck the juice without swallowing the animal. Serpents suck the juice
internally.

2. The serpent swallows any food which may be presented to it, for it
will devour both birds and beasts, and suck eggs. When it has taken
its food it draws itself up, till it stands erect upon its extremity,
it then gathers itself up and contracts itself a little, so that when
stretched out the animal it has swallowed may descend in its stomach;
it does this because its œsophagus is long and thin. Phalangia and
serpents can live a long while without food, this may be seen in those
that are kept by dealers in medicine.


CHAPTER VII.

1. Among viviparous quadrupeds, those that are wild and have pointed
teeth are all carnivorous, except some wolves, which, when they are
hungry, will, as they say, eat a certain kind of earth, but this is the
only exception. They will not eat grass unless they are sick, for some
dogs eat grass and vomit it up again, and so are purified. The solitary
wolves are more eager for human flesh than those which hunt in packs.

2. The animal which some persons call the glanus and others the hyæna,
is not less than the wolf, it has a mane like a horse, but the hair all
along its spine is more harsh and thick. It also secretly attacks men,
and hunts them down; it hunts dogs also by vomiting like men; it also
breaks open graves for the sake of this kind of food.

3. The bear is also omnivorous, for it eats fruit, and on account of
the softness of its body it can climb trees; it eats leguminous seeds
also; it also overturns hives and eats the honey, and it feeds upon
crabs and ants, and is carnivorous, for its strength enables it to
attack not only deer, but wild hogs, if it can fall upon them secretly,
and oxen. For when it meets the bull face to face, it falls upon its
back, and when the bull attempts to throw it, seizes its horns with its
fore-legs, and biting upon the shoulder of the bull, throws it down.
For a short time it can walk upright on its hind legs. It eats flesh
after it has become putrid.

4. The lion, like all other wild animals with pointed teeth, is
carnivorous; it devours its food greedily, and swallows large pieces
without dividing them; it can afterwards, from its repletion, remain
two or three days without food. It drinks very little. Its excrement
is small, and is not made more than once in three days or thereabouts,
and it is dry and hard like that of a dog. The wind from its bowels has
an acrid smell, and its urine is powerfully scented, for which reason
dogs smell to trees, for the lion, like the dog, lifts its leg to make
water. It produces also a strong smell when it breathes upon its food,
and when its bowels are laid open they emit a strong scent.

5. Some quadrupeds and wild animals seek their food in the
neighbourhood of ponds and rivers, but none of them except the seal
live near the sea; of this class are the creature called beaver, and
the satherium, the satyrium, the otter, and that which is called latax.
This creature is broader than the enydris, and has strong teeth, for it
often goes out in the night and with its teeth gnaws off the osiers.
The enydris also will bite men, and they say will not leave its hold
till it hears the noise of its teeth against the bone. The latax has
rough hair, the nature of which is between that of the seal and that of
the deer.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. Animals with pointed teeth drink by lapping, and some that have not
pointed teeth, as mice. Those which have an even surface to their teeth
draw in the water as horses and oxen; the bear neither draws in the
water nor laps it, but gulps it down. Some birds draw in the water, but
those which have long necks imbibe it at intervals, lifting up their
heads; the porphyrion alone gulps it down. All horned animals, both
domestic and wild, and those that have not pointed teeth eat fruits and
grass, and are incapable of enduring hunger, except the dog, and this
animal eats fruit and grass less than any other.

2. The hog eats roots more than other animals, because its snout is
well adapted for this operation, it is more adapted to various kinds
of food than other animals. In proportion to its size its fat is
developed very fast, for it becomes fat in sixty days. Those who occupy
themselves in fatting hogs know how fast they fatten by weighing them
when lean; they will become fat after starvation for three days. Almost
all other animals become fat, after previous starvation. After three
days those who fatten hogs feed them well.

3. The Thracians fatten them by giving them drink on the first day,
then at first they omit one day, afterwards two, three, or four, till
they reach to seven days. These creatures are fattened with barley,
millet, figs, acorns, wild pears, and cucumbers. Both this and other
animals with a warm stomach are fattened in idleness, and the sow
also by wallowing in the mire. They prefer different kinds of food at
different ages. The hog and the wolf fight together, a sixth part of
its weight when alive, consists of bristles, blood, and fat. Sows and
all other animals grow lean while suckling their young. This then, is
the nature of these animals.


CHAPTER IX.

1. Oxen eat both fruits and grass. They become fat on flatulent food,
as vetches, broken beans, and stems of beans, and if any person having
cut a hole in the skin inflates them and then feeds the older cattle,
they fatten more rapidly, and either on whole or broken barley, or on
sweet food, as on figs and grapes, wine, and the leaves of the elm, and
especially in the sunshine and in warm waters. The horns of the calf,
if anointed with wax, may be directed in any way that is desired, and
they suffer less in the feet if their horns are rubbed with wax, or
pitch, or oil.

2. Herds of cattle suffer less when moved in frost than in snow. They
grow if they are deprived for a long time of sexual intercourse;
wherefore the herdsmen in Epirus keep the Pyrrhic cattle, as they are
called, for nine years without sexual intercourse, in order that they
may grow. They call such cows apotauri. The number of these creatures
reaches four hundred, and they are the property of the king. They will
not live in any other country, though the attempt has been made.


CHAPTER X.

1. The horse, mule, and ass feed upon fruit and grass, but they
fatten especially on drinking, so that beasts of burden enjoy their
food in proportion to the quantity of water which they drink, and the
less difficulty there is of obtaining drink, the more they profit by
abundance of grass. When the mare is in foal, green food causes her
hair to be fine, but when it contains hard knots it is not wholesome.
The first crop of Medic grass is not good, nor if any stinking water
has come near it, for it gives it a bad smell. Oxen require pure water
to drink, but horses in this respect resemble camels. The camel prefers
water that is dirty and thick; nor will it drink from a stream before
it has disturbed the water. It can remain without drinking four days,
after which it drinks a great quantity.


CHAPTER XI.

1. The elephant can eat more than nine Macedonian medimni at one meal,
but so much food at once is dangerous; it should not have altogether
more than six or seven medimni, or five medimni of bread, and five
mares of wine, the maris measures six cotylæ. An elephant has been
known to drink as much as fourteen Macedonian measures at once, and
eight more again in the evening. Many camels live thirty years, and
some much more, for they have been known to live an hundred years. Some
say that the elephant lives two hundred, and others three hundred years.


CHAPTER XII.

1. Sheep and goats live upon grass. Sheep pasture for a long while
in one place without leaving it, but goats change their places very
soon, and only crop the top of the grass. The sheep fatten rapidly
with drinking, and for this reason during summer they give them
salt, a medimnus to each hundred sheep; for in this manner the flock
becomes more healthy and fat, and frequently they collect and bring
them together for this purpose, that they may mix a great deal of
salt with their food; for when thirsty they drink the more. And in
the autumn they feed them with gourds which they have sprinkled with
salt, for this makes them give more milk. When driven about in the heat
of the day they drink more towards evening. If fed with salt after
parturition, the udder becomes larger.

2. Sheep fatten on green shoots, vetches, and all kinds of grass, and
they fatten more rapidly when their food is salted. They fatten more
rapidly if previously starved for three days. During autumn northern
water is better for sheep than southern, and pastures towards the
west are good for them. Long journeys and weariness make them lean.
Shepherds distinguish the strong sheep during winter by the frost
adhering to their wool, which is not the case with those that are sick;
for those that are not strong move about in their weakness and shake it
off.

3. The flesh of all quadrupeds which feed in marshy grounds is
inferior to that of those which live on high ground. Sheep with wide
tails endure the winter better than those with long tails, and short
woolled-sheep better than long-woolled, and those with curly wool are
more affected by the cold. Sheep are more healthy than goats, though
goats are the stronger. The fleece and the wool of sheep which have
been devoured by wolves, and garments made of such wool are more
subject to vermin than others.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. Those insects which have teeth are omnivorous, but those which have
a tongue only live upon fluids, which they collect from all sources
with this organ. Some of these are omnivorous, for they feed upon all
kinds of fluids, as the fly. Others only suck blood, as the myops and
œstrus. Others, again, live upon the juices of plants and fruit. The
bee is the only insect that never touches anything putrid. It uses
no food that has not a sweet taste. They also take very sweet water,
wherever they fall upon any that is pure. The different kinds of
animals then use these kinds of food.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. All the actions of animals are employed either in sexual
intercourse, or in rearing their young, or in procuring food for
themselves, or in providing against excessive heat and cold, and the
changes of the seasons. For they all have naturally a sensitiveness
respecting heat and cold, and, like mankind, who either change their
abodes in cold weather, or those who have large estates, pass their
summer in cold countries and their winter in warm ones; so animals,
also, if they can, migrate from place to place. Some of them find
protection in their accustomed localities, others are migratory; and at
the autumnal equinox, escape at the approach of winter, from the Pontus
and other cold places; and in spring retreat again before the approach
of summer from hot to cold countries, for they are afraid of excessive
heat. Some migrate from places close at hand, and others from the very
ends of the earth.

2. The cranes do this, for they travel from Scythia to the marshes in
the higher parts of Egypt, from which the Nile originates. This is
the place where the Pygmies dwell; and this is no fable, for there is
really, as it is said, a race of dwarfs, both men and horses, which
lead the life of troglodites. The pelicans also are migratory, and
leave the river Strymon for the Ister, where they rear their young.
They depart in great crowds, and those that are before wait for those
behind, for in flying over the mountains those behind cannot see the
leaders.

3. The fish also, in the same manner, migrate either from or to the
Pontus, and in winter they leave the deep water for the sake of the
warmth of the shore, and in summer they escape from the heat by
migrating from the shore into deep water. Delicate birds, also, in
winter and frosty weather, descend from the mountains to the plains,
for the sake of the warmth; and in summer they return again to the
mountains for fear of the heat.

4. Those that are the most delicate are the first to make the change
at each extreme of heat and cold, such as the mackerel migrate sooner
than the tunnies, and the quails than cranes; for some migrate in
August, others in September. They are always fatter when they migrate
from cold countries, than when they leave warm countries, as the quail
is more fat in the autumn than the spring: and so it happens that they
migrate alike from cold countries and from warm seasons. Their sexual
desires are also more violent in the spring, and when they leave warm
countries.

5. Among birds, as it was previously remarked, the crane migrates from
one extremity of the earth to the other, and they fly against the wind.
As for the story about the stone, it is a fiction, for they say that
they carry a stone as ballast, which is useful as a touchstone for
gold, after they have vomited it up. The phatta and the peleias leave
us, and do not winter with us, nor does the turtle; but the pigeon
stays through the winter. The same is the nature of the quail, unless
a few individuals both of the turtle and quail remain behind in sunny
spots. The phatta and turtle assemble in large flocks when they depart,
and again at the season of their return. The quails, when they commence
their flight, if the weather is fine and the wind in the north, go in
pairs, and have a successful voyage. If the wind is south it goes hard
with them, for their flight is slow, and this wind is moist and heavy.
Those that hunt them, therefore, pursue them when the wind is in the
south, but not in fine weather. They fly badly on account of their
weight, for their body is large. They therefore make a noise as they
fly, for it is a toil to them.

6. When they come hither they have no leader, but when they depart
hence, the glottis, ortygometra, otus, and cychramus, which calls them
together at night, accompany them; and when the fowlers hear this
sound, they know that they will not remain. The ortygometra in form
resembles the birds which inhabit marshes. The glottis has a tongue
which it projects to a great length. The otus resembles an owl, and has
small feathers at its ears. Some persons call it the nycticorax, it is
mischievous and imitative, it is taken like the owl, as it dances from
side to side, one or other of the fowlers compassing it about. On the
whole birds with crooked claws have short necks, broad tongues, and a
capacity for imitation. And so has the Indian bird, the parrot, which
is said to have a tongue like a man. It becomes the most loquacious
when intoxicated. The crow, the swan, the pelican, and the small goose,
are gregarious birds.


CHAPTER XV.

1. It has already been observed that fish migrate from the deep water
to the coast, and from the coast to the deep water, in order to avoid
the excesses of cold and heat. Those that frequent the neighbourhood
of the coast are better than those from deep water, for the feeding
grounds are better and more abundant. For wherever the sun strikes
the plants are more frequent, and superior, and more delicate, as in
gardens, and the black shore-weed grows near the land, and the other
kinds rather resemble uncultivated plants. The neighbourhood of the
coast is also more temperate, both in heat and cold, than the rest of
the sea; for which reason the flesh of fish which live near the shore
is more compact, while that of fish from deep sea is watery and soft.
The sinodon, cantharus, orphos, chrysophrys, cestreus, trigla, cichla,
dracon, callionymus, cobius, and all the rock fish live near the shore.
The trygon, selache, the white congers, the channa, erythrinus, and
glaucus inhabit deep water. The phagrus, scorpius, the black conger,
the muræna, and coccyx occupy either situation indifferently.

2. They vary also in different places; as in the neighbourhood of Crete
the cobius and all the rock fish are fat. The tunny also becomes good
again after Arcturus, for it is not tormented by the œstrus after that
period; for which reason also it is inferior during the summer. In
lakes near the sea also there are several kinds of fish, as the salpa,
chrysophrys, trigla, and nearly all the rest. The amia also is found in
such situations as in the vicinity of Alopeconnesus, and in the lake
of Bistonis there are many fish. Many of the coliæ do not enter the
Pontus; but they pass the summer and rear their young in the Propontis,
and winter in the Ægean. The thynnus, pelamis, and amia enter the
Pontus in the spring and pass the summer there, and so do nearly all
the rhyades and the gregarious fish. Many fish are gregarious, and
gregarious fish have a leader of the shoal.

3. They all enter the Pontus for the sake of the food (for the pasture
is more abundant and superior, on account of the fresh water), and
for fear of the large creatures, which are smaller there; and except
the phocona and dolphin, there is no other found in the Pontus; and
the dolphin is small, but when we leave the Pontus we find a larger
dolphin. They enter this sea for the sake of food and rearing their
young; for the situation is better for this purpose, and the fresh
sweet water nourishes the young fry. When they have reared their young,
and the fry begin to grow, they migrate immediately after the Pleiades.
If the south wind blow during the winter, they leave the place more
slowly; but with a north wind they swim faster, for then the wind
helps them along. The small fry is captured in the neighbourhood of
Byzantium, for they make no long stay in the Pontus.

4. The other fish are seen both in their egress and ingress. The
trichia is only seen as it enters, and is not observed to leave again;
and if one is captured at Byzantium, the fishermen purify their nets,
for it is unusual for them to return. The reason is this: these are the
only fish that swim up into the Ister, and when this river divides they
swim down into the Adriatic. The following is a proof; for the converse
happens here, and they are never captured entering the Adriatic, but as
they leave it.

5. The tunnies, as they enter, swim with their right side to the shore,
and leave with their left side to the shore; and some persons say
that they do this because they see better with their right eye, and
their sight is naturally dim. The rhyades move during the day, and in
the night remain quiet and feed, unless the moon is bright, in which
case they continue their journey and do not rest themselves. And some
persons engaged about the sea say that after the winter solstice they
do not move, but remain quiet wherever they may be till the equinox.

6. The coliæ are taken as they enter, but not as they return. The
best are taken in the Propontis before the breeding season. The other
rhyades are captured more frequently as they leave the Pontus, and are
then in perfection. Those that swim near the shore are the fattest
when captured; and the farther they are away, the more lean they are;
and frequently, when the south wind blows, they swim out in company
with the coliæ and mackerel, and are taken lower down rather than at
Byzantium. This is the nature of their migrations.


CHAPTER XVI.

1. Land animals have also the same disposition for concealment. For in
winter they all hasten to conceal themselves, and appear again when
the season becomes warmer. Animals conceal themselves to guard against
the excesses of temperature. In some the whole race is concealed; in
others only a part of them. All the testacea conceal themselves, as
those which are marine, the purpura, whelk, and all that class; but the
state of concealment is more conspicuous in those which do not adhere
to rocks; for these also conceal themselves, as the pectens. Some have
an operculum on their exterior, as the land snails; and the alteration
of those that are not free is inconspicuous. They do not all conceal
themselves at the same period; for the snails are torpid during the
winter, the purpura and whelk for thirty days under the dog star, and
the pectens at the same period. Most of them conceal themselves in very
cold and very hot weather.

2. Almost all insects become torpid, except those which dwell in the
habitations of men, and those that perish and do not survive for a
year. They are torpid in the winter. Some conceal themselves for a
good while, others only in the coldest days, as the bees, for these
also conceal themselves. This is shown by their not touching the food
which is prepared for them; and if any of them creep out, they appear
transparent, and plainly have nothing in their stomach. They remain at
rest from the setting of the Pleiades until the spring. Animals pass
their torpid state in warm places, and in the spots they are accustomed
to inhabit.


CHAPTER XVII.

1. Many sanguineous animals become torpid, as those which are furnished
with scales, the serpent, lizard, gecko, and the river crocodile,
during the four winter months in which they eat nothing. Other serpents
conceal themselves in the earth, but the viper lies hidden among
stones. Many fish also become torpid, especially the hippurus and
coracinus during the winter; for these alone are never taken but at
certain seasons, which never vary. Almost all the rest are taken at all
seasons. The lamprey, orphus, and conger conceal themselves. The rock
fish conceal themselves in pairs, as the cichla, cottyphus, and perca,
the male with the female, in which way also they prepare for their
young.

2. The tunny conceals itself during winter in deep places, and they
become fattest at this season. The season of capturing them commences
with the rising of Pleiades, and continues to the end of the setting of
Arcturus. All the rest of their time they remain quiet in concealment.
A few of these are taken during the period of their concealment, and
so are some other hybernating creatures, if they are disturbed by the
warmth of their abode or the unusual mildness of the season. For they
come out a little from their holes to feed, and also when the moon is
full. Most fish are better tasted during the period of concealment. The
primades bury themselves in the mud. This is shown by their not being
taken, or their seeming to have a great deal of mud on their backs and
their fins pressed down.

3. In spring, however, they begin to move and come to the shore to
copulate and deposit their ova. At this season they are captured full
of ova, and then also they appear to be in season, but are not so good
in autumn and winter. At the same season also the males appear to be
full of melt. When their ova are small they are taken with difficulty;
but as they grow larger many are taken when they are infested by the
œstrus. Some fish bury themselves in sand, others in mud, with only
their mouths above the surface. Fishes usually conceal themselves
only in the winter. The malacostraca, the rock fishes, the batus,
and selache only in the most severe weather. This is shown by the
difficulty of capturing them in cold weather.

4. Some fish, as the glaucus, conceal themselves in summer time; for
this fish hides itself for sixty days in the summer time. The onus and
the chrysophrys hide themselves. The reason for supposing that the onus
hides itself for a long while appears to be that it is captured at long
intervals; and the influence of the stars upon them; and especially of
the dog-star, appears to be the cause of their hiding themselves in
summer time, for the sea is then disturbed. This is most conspicuous in
the Bosphorus; for the mud is thrown up, and the fish are thus brought
to the surface; and they say that, when the bottom is disturbed, more
fish are often taken in the same cast the second than the first time;
and after much rain animals make their appearance which before were
either not seen at all or but seldom.


CHAPTER XVIII.

1. Many kinds of birds also conceal themselves, and they do not all,
as some suppose, migrate to warmer climates; but those which are near
the places of which they are permanent inhabitants, as the kite and
swallow, migrate thither; but those that are farther off from such
places do not migrate, but conceal themselves; and many swallows have
been seen in hollow places almost stripped of feathers; and kites,
when they first showed themselves, have come from similar situations.
Birds with crooked claws, and those also with straight claws, conceal
themselves indiscriminately; for the stork, blackbird,[217] turtle
dove, and lark hide themselves, and by general agreement the turtle
dove most of all, for no one is ever said to have seen one during the
winter. At the commencement of hybernation it is very fat, and during
that season it loses its feathers, though they remain thick for a long
while. Some of the doves conceal themselves; others do not, but migrate
along with the swallows. The thrush and the starling also conceal
themselves, and among birds with crooked claws the kite and the owl are
not seen for a few days.

[217] Κόττυφος, Turdus merula, _Strack_, blackbird, but probably more
than one kind of bird is included under the same name. Compare 9, 36, 2.


CHAPTER XIX.

1. Among viviparous quadrupeds the porcupines and bears hybernate. It
is evident that the wild bears conceal themselves; but there is some
doubt whether it is on account of the cold or from any other cause,
for at this season both the males and females are so fat that they
cannot move easily. The female also produces her young at this season,
and hides herself until the cubs are of an age to be led forth. This
she does in the spring, about three months after the solstice, and she
continues invisible for at least forty days. During fourteen days of
this period they say that she does not move at all. For more than this
period afterwards she remains invisible, but moves about and is awake.
A pregnant bear has either never or very rarely been captured; and it
is quite plain that they eat nothing during the whole of this period;
for they never come out; and if they are captured, their stomach and
entrails appear to be empty; and it is said that, because nothing
is presented to it, the intestine sometimes adheres to itself; and,
therefore, at their first emergence, they eat the arum, in order to
open the entrail and make a passage through it.

2. The dormouse hybernates in trees and is then very fat, and the
white Pontic mouse. (Some hybernating animals cast their old age, as
it is called. This is the outer skin and the coverings at the period
of birth.) It has already been observed, that among viviparous animals
with feet there is some doubt as to the cause of the hybernation of
bears; but almost all animals with scales hybernate and cast their old
age; that is, all that have a soft skin and no shell, as the tortoise;
for both the tortoise and the emys belong to the class of animals with
scales; but all such as the gecko, lizard, and especially the serpents,
cast their skins; for they do this both in the spring, when they first
emerge, and again in the autumn.

3. The viper also casts its skin both in the spring and autumn, and is
not, as some persons say, the only serpent that does not cast its skin.
When serpents begin to cast their skin, it is first of all separated
from their eyes; and to those who do not know what is about to happen
they appear to be blind. After this it is separated from the head, for
first of all it appears entirely white. In a night and day the whole
of the old skin is separated from the commencement at the head to the
tail; and when cast it is turned inside out, for the serpent emerges as
the infant does from the chorion.

4. Insects which cast their skins do it in the same way as the silpha,
empis, and the coleoptera, as the beetle. All creatures cast it after
birth; for in viviparous animals the chorion is separated, and in
the vermiparous, as bees and locusts, they emerge from a case. The
grasshoppers, when they cast their skins, sit upon olives and reeds.
When the case is ruptured, they emerge, and leave a little fluid behind
them, and after a short time they fly away and sing.

5. Among marine creatures the carabi and astaci cast their skins either
in spring or autumn, after having deposited their ova; and carabi
have been sometimes taken with a soft thorax, because their shell was
ruptured, while the lower part, which was not ruptured, was hard. For
the process is not the same in them as in serpents. The carabi remain
in concealment for about five months. The crabs also cast their old
skin, certainly those which have soft shells; and they say that those
which have hard shells do the same, as the maia and graus. When they
have cast their shells, the new shells are first of all soft, and the
crabs are unable to walk. They do not cast their skins once only,
but frequently. I have now described when and how animals conceal
themselves, and what creatures cast their skin, and when they do so.


CHAPTER XX.

1. Animals are not all in good health at the same season, nor in the
same degrees of heat and cold. Their health and diseases are different
at different seasons in various classes, and on the whole are not alike
in all. Dry weather agrees with birds, both in respect of their general
health and the rearing of their young, and especially with pigeons; and
wet weather, with few exceptions, agrees with fish. On the contrary,
showery weather generally disagrees with birds, and dry weather with
fish; for, on the whole, abundance of drink does not agree with birds.

2. For the birds with crooked claws, generally speaking, as it was
before remarked, do not drink. But Hesiod was ignorant of this
circumstance; for in relating the siege of Nineveh he represents the
presiding eagle of the augury drinking. Other birds drink, but not
much; neither do any other oviparous animals with spongy lungs. The
sickness of birds is manifest in their plumage; for it is uneven, and
has not the same smoothness as when they are well.

3. The generality of fish, as it was observed, thrive the most in rainy
years; for not only in such seasons do they obtain a greater supply of
food, but the wet weather agrees with them as with the plants that grow
on land; for potherbs, even if watered, do not grow so well as in wet
weather. The same is the case with the reeds that grow in ponds; for
they never grow, as we may say, except in rainy weather.

4. And this is the reason why so many fish migrate every summer into
the Pontus; for the number of rivers which flow into it render the
water fresh, and also bring down a supply of food, and many fish also
ascend the rivers, and flourish in the rivers and lakes, as the amia
and mullet. The cobii also become fat in the rivers; and on the whole,
those places which have the largest lakes furnish the most excellent
fish.

5. Of all kinds of water, summer showers agree best with fish; and if
the spring, summer, and autumn have been wet, a fine winter. And to
speak generally, if the season is healthy for mankind, it will be the
same for fish. They do not thrive in cold places. Those which have
a stone in their head, as the chromis, labrax, sciœna, and phagrus,
suffer most in the winter; for the refrigeration of the stone causes
them to freeze and be driven on shore.

6. Abundant rain confers health on most fish; but the contrary is the
case with the mullet and cephalus, which some call marinus; for if
there is a great supply of rain water, they soon become blind. The
cephali are particularly liable to this disease in the winter; for
their eyes become white. When captured they are lean, and at last
perish altogether. They do not, however, appear to suffer so much from
the wet as from the cold; for in other places, and especially in the
swamps in the neighbourhood of the Argive Nauplia, many are found blind
in severe weather, and many also are taken with white eyes.

7. The chrysophrys also suffers from the cold; the arachnas from the
heat, which makes it lean. Dry seasons agree better with the coracinus
than with any other fish, and for this reason, because it is generally
warm in dry weather. Particular localities are favourable to different
species, as either the neighbourhood of the land, or the deep waters to
those which only frequent one of these localities, or particular places
to those which frequent both. There are especial places in which each
of them thrive; but, generally speaking, they prefer places full of sea
weed; for those which inhabit places with plenty of food are generally
found to be fatter; for those that eat fuci obtain plenty of food,
while those that are carnivorous find an abundant supply of fish.

8. They are also affected by northern and southern aspects, for the
long fish thrive best in northern situations, and in northern places
in the summer time more long fish than flat fish are taken in the same
locality. The tunny and xiphia suffer from the œstrus, at the rising
of the dog-star, for both these fish at this season have beneath their
fins a little worm which is called œstrus, which resembles a scorpion,
and is about the size of a spider; they suffer so much from this
torment that the xiphias leaps out of the sea as high as the dolphin,
and in this manner frequently falls upon ships.

9. The tunny delights in warm weather more than any other fish, and
they resort to the sand near the sea-shore for the sake of the warmth,
and there they float on the surface; the small fish are safe because
they are overlooked, for large fish pursue those of a moderate size.
The greater portion of the ova and melt are destroyed ... by the heat,
for whatever they touch they entirely destroy.

10. The greatest number of fish are taken before sunrise and after
sunset, or just about sunrise and sunset, for the casts made at this
period are called seasonable. For this reason the fishermen take up
their nets at this time, for the sight of the fish is then most readily
deceived. During the night they remain quiet, and at mid-day, when the
light is strong, they see very well.

11. Fish do not appear to be subject to any of those pestilential
diseases which so often occur among men and quadrupeds, as the horse
and ox, and other animals, both domestic and wild. They appear,
however, to suffer from ill health, and the fishermen consider that
this is proved by the capture of some lean, and apparently weak
individuals, and others that have lost their colour, among a number of
fat ones of the same kind. This is the nature of sea-fish.

12. No pestilential disease attacks river and pond fish, though some of
them are subject to peculiar diseases, as the glanis, from its swimming
near the surface, appears to be star-struck by the dog-star, and it is
stupefied by loud thunder. The carp suffers in the same way, but not
so severely. The glanis, in shallow water, is often destroyed by the
dragon-serpent. In the ballerus and tilon a worm is produced, under
the influence of the dog-star, which makes them rise to the surface
and become weak, and when they come to the surface they are killed by
the heat; a violent disease attacks the chalcis, which is destroyed by
a number of lice, which are produced under its gills; no other fish
appear to be subject to such a disease.

13. Fishes are poisoned with the plant called mullein, for which reason
some persons capture them by poisoning the waters of rivers and ponds;
and the Phœnicians poison the sea in the same way. There are two other
plans which are adopted for the capture of fish; for since fish avoid
the deep parts of rivers in cold weather (for even otherwise the river
water is cold), they dig a ditch through the land to the river, which
they cover over with grass and stones so as to resemble a cave, with
one opening from the river, and when the frost comes on they capture
the fish with a basket. The other mode of fishing is practised both in
summer and winter. In the middle of the stream they raise a structure
with faggots and stones, leaving one part open for a mouth; in this a
basket is placed, with which they catch the fish, as they take away the
stones.

14. Rainy years agree with all the testacea except the purpura; this is
a proof of it, if placed near the mouth of a river, they take the fresh
water, and die the same day. The purpura will live about fifty days
after it has been taken. They are nourished by each other, for a plant
like a fucus or moss grows upon their shells. They say that whatever
is cast to them for food is done for the sake of weight, that they may
weigh the more.

15. Dry weather is injurious to other testacea, for it renders them
fewer in quantity and inferior in quality, and the pectens become more
red. In the Pyrrhæan Euripus the pectens perish, not only from the
instrument with which the fishermen scrape them together, but also from
dry weather. The other testacea thrive in wet weather, because it makes
the sea-water fresher. The cold of the Pontus and of the rivers that
flow into it renders bivalve shells rare. The univalves, however, are
frozen in cold weather. This is the nature of aquatic animals.


CHAPTER XXI.

1. Among quadrupeds, swine suffer from three diseases, one of these
is called sore throat, in which the parts above the jaws and the
branchia become inflamed; it may also occur in other parts of the
body, and frequently seizes upon the foot, and sometimes the ear. The
neighbouring parts then become putrid, until it reaches the lungs,
when the animal dies; the disease spreads rapidly, and the animal eats
nothing from the period of the commencement of the disease, be it where
it will. The swineherds have no other remedy but the excision of the
part before the disease has spread far.

2. There are two other diseases which are both called craura. One of
them consists in a pain and weight in the head, with which many of them
are afflicted; the other is an excessive alvine discharge. This appears
to be incurable. They relieve the former by the application of wine to
the nostrils, and washing them with wine. Recovery from this disease is
difficult, for it generally carries them off on the third or fourth day.

3. They suffer particularly from sore throat, when the summer bears
abundantly, and they are fat. The fruit of the mulberry is good for
them, and abundant washings with warm water, and scarification beneath
the tongue. If the flesh of swine is soft, it is full of small lumps
(chalazæ) about the legs, neck, and shoulders; for in these parts the
chalazæ are most frequent. If there are but a few, the flesh is sweet;
if many, it becomes very fluid and soft.

4. Those which have these chalazæ are easily distinguished; for they
exist in the greatest numbers under the tongue, and if the hair is
plucked from their mane it appears bloody underneath. Those which
have chalazæ cannot keep their hind legs still. They are not thus
affected as long as they suck. The grain called tipha, which also forms
excellent food, is the remedy for the chalazæ. Vetches and figs are
useful both for fattening and rearing pigs; and on the whole their
food should not be all of one sort, but varied; for swine, like other
animals, derive advantage from a change in their food; and they say
that at the same time their food ought to inflate them, and to cover
them both with flesh and fat. Acorns are good for their food, but
make their flesh watery; and if they eat too many while pregnant, they
produce abortions, as sheep also do; for these animals evidently suffer
this from eating acorns. The swine is the only creature that we know of
which has chalazæ in its flesh.


CHAPTER XXII.

1. Dogs suffer from these diseases which have received these names,
lytta, cynanche, podagra. The lytta produces madness, and they
infect every creature which they bite, except mankind, with the same
disease. This disease is fatal to dogs and to any other animal they
may bite except man. The cynanche also is fatal to dogs; and there
are comparatively few which recover from the podagra. Camels also are
seized with lytta. (The elephant does not appear to suffer from any
other infirmity except flatulency.)

2. Gregarious oxen suffer from two diseases, one called podagra, the
other craurus. The podagra affects their feet; but it is not fatal, nor
do they lose their hoofs. They derive benefit from their horns being
smeared with warm pitch. When attacked with craurus, their breathing
becomes warm and thick. Fever in mankind is the same as craurus in
cattle. It is a sign of this disease, when they hang down their ears
and will not eat. It soon proves fatal, and when dissected, their lungs
appear putrid.


CHAPTER XXIII.

1. Horses when grazing are free from all diseases except podagra; from
this they suffer, and sometimes lose their hoofs, which grow again as
soon as they are lost, and the loss of the hoof usually takes place as
soon as the first recommences its growth. It is a sign of the disease
when the right testicle throbs, or when a wrinkled hollow place appears
a little below the middle of the nose. Horses that are brought up in a
domestic state suffer from several other diseases; they are attacked
with a disorder in their bowels, and it is a sign of the disease when
they drag their hind legs up to their fore legs, and keep them under
in such a way that they almost strike together: if they go mad after
having abstained from food for several days, they are relieved by
bleeding and castration.[218]

[218] The passage is altogether corrupt.

2. The tetanus is another disease of horses, which is thus recognised;
all the veins, and the head and neck are extended, and their legs
are stiff when they walk; the horses also become full of corrupt
matter. They are also attacked by another disease in which they
are said to have the crithia;[219] the softness of the roof of the
mouth, and heated breath, are the signs of this disease, which is
incurable, unless it stays of its own accord. Another disease is called
nymphia,[220] which is relieved by the sound of a flute; it causes them
to hang down their heads, and when anyone mounts they rush forward
until they run against something. The horse is always dejected if
afflicted with madness; this is a sign of it, if it lays down its ears
upon its mane, and then draws them forward, and pants and breathes hard.

[219] Indigestion caused by eating barley when heated.

[220] Phrensy.

3. These also are incurable if the heart is affected. It is a sign
of this disease if the animal suffers from relaxation. And if the
bladder alters its position, difficulty in making water is a sign
of this disease; it draws up the hoofs and loins. It is also fatal
for the horse to swallow the staphilinus, which is of the same size
as the spondyla. The bite of the shrew mouse is injurious to other
animals also; it causes sores, which are more severe if the creature
is pregnant when it bites, for the sores then break. If they are not
pregnant, the animal does not perish. The creature called chalkis by
some persons and zygnis by others, inflicts either a fatal or very
painful bite. It resembles a small lizard, and is of the same colour as
the serpent called the blind worm.

4. And, on the whole, those who understand horses say that both these
animals and sheep suffer from all the infirmities with which mankind is
afflicted. The horse, and every other beast of burden, is destroyed by
the poison of sandarach.[221] It is dissolved in water and strained.
The pregnant mare casts her young with the smell of a lamp going out.
This also happens to some pregnant women. This is the nature of the
diseases of horses.

[221] Red sulphuret of arsenic.

5. The hippomanes, as it is called, is said to be produced upon the
foals; the mares when they have bitten it off lick the foal and
cleanse it. The fables on this subject have been invented by women and
charmers. It is, however, agreed that mares before parturition eject
the substance called polion.

6. Horses recognise again the voices of any with which they may have
fought. They delight in meadows and marshes, and drink dirty water; and
if it is clean, they first disturb it with their hoof, and then drink
and wash themselves. And on the whole, the horse is an animal fond of
water, and still more fond of moisture; wherefore, also, the nature of
the river-horse is thus constituted. In this respect the ox is very
different from the horse, for it will not drink unless the water is
clean, cold, and unmixed.


CHAPTER XXIV.

1. Asses only suffer from one disease, which is called melis, which
first attacks the head of the animal, and causes a thick and bloody
phlegm to flow from the nostrils. If the disease extends to the lungs,
it is fatal; but that which first attacks the head is not so. This
animal cannot bear cold, for which reason there are no asses in the
vicinity of the Pontus and in Scythia.


CHAPTER XXV.

1. Elephants suffer from flatulent diseases, for which reason they can
neither evacuate their fluid or solid excrements. If they eat earth
they become weak, unless used to such food. If it is accustomed to
it, it does no harm. Sometimes the elephant swallows stones. It also
suffers from diarrhœa. When attacked with this complaint, they are
cured by giving them warm water to drink, and hay dipped in honey to
eat; and either of these remedies will stop the disease. When fatigued
for want of sleep, they are cured by being rubbed on the shoulders
with salt and oil, and warm water. When they suffer from pain in the
shoulders, they are relieved by the application of roasted swine's
flesh. Some elephants will drink oil, and some will not; and if any
iron weapon is struck into their body, the oil which they drink assists
in its expulsion; and to those which will not drink it, they give wine
of rice cooked with oil. This, then, is the nature of quadrupeds.


CHAPTER XXVI.

1. Insects generally thrive when the year is of the same kind as
the season in which they were born, such as the spring, moist and
warm. Certain creatures are produced in beehives, which destroy the
combs, and a little spinning worm, which destroys the wax. It is
called clerus, or by some persons pyraustes. This creature produces
a spider-like animal like itself, which causes sickness in the hive,
and another creature like the moth, which flies round the candle. This
produces a creature filled with a woolly substance. It is not killed by
the bees, and is only driven out by smoking it. A kind of caterpillar
also, which is called teredo, is produced in the hives. The bees do not
drive it away. They suffer most from diseases when the woods produce
flowers infected with rust, and in dry seasons. All insects die when
plunged in oil, and most rapidly if their head is oiled, and they are
placed in the sun.


CHAPTER XXVII.

1. Animals also differ in their localities: for some are entirely
absent from some localities which exist in others, though small and
shortlived, and not thriving. And frequently there will be a great
difference even in adjoining places, as the grasshopper is found in
some parts of Milesia, and is absent from those in the immediate
vicinity. And in Cephalenia a river divides the country, on one side of
which the grasshopper is found, and not on the other.

2. In Poroselene a road divides the country, on one side of which the
weasel is found, and not on the other. In Bœotia there are many moles
in the neighbourhood of Orchomenus, but in the adjoining Lebadian
district there are none, nor if they are imported, are they willing
to burrow. If hares are taken into Ithaca they will not live, but are
seen dead on the sea coast, turned in the direction in which they were
brought. In Sicily the hippomyrmex is not found, and in Cyrene there
were formerly no croaking frogs.

3. In all Libya there is neither wild boar, nor stag, nor wild goat.
And in India, Ctesias, who is not worthy of credit, says, there are
neither domestic nor wild swine; but the exsanguineous and burrowing
tribes are all large. In the Pontus there are no malacia, nor all the
kinds of testacea, except in a few places; but in the Red Sea all the
testacea are of a great size. In Syria there are sheep with tails a
cubit in width, and the ears of the goats are a span and four fingers,
and some of them bring their ears down to the ground: and the oxen,
like the camels, have a mane upon the point of the shoulder. In Lycia
the goats are shorn as the sheep are in other places.

4. In Libya the horned rams are born at once with horns, and not the
males only, as Homer says, but all the rest also. In the part of
Scythia near the Pontus, the contrary is the case, for they are born
without horns. And in Egypt some of the cattle, as the oxen and sheep,
are larger than in Greece, and others are smaller, as the dogs, wolves,
hares, foxes, ravens, and hawks. Others are nearly of the same size,
as the crows and goats. This difference originates in the food which
is abundant for some, and scarce for others. For the wolves, hawks,
and carnivorous creatures food is scarce, for there are but few small
birds. For the dasypus and others which are not carnivorous, neither
the hard nor soft fruits are of any long continuance.

5. The temperature is also very influential; for in Illyria, Thrace,
and Epirus, the asses are small. In Scythia, and Celtic countries,
they do not occur at all, for in these places the winter is severe. In
Arabia the lizards are more than a cubit long, and the mice are much
larger than those which inhabit our fields, their fore legs being a
span long, and their hind legs as long as from the first joint of the
finger....

6. In Libya, the serpents, as it has been already remarked, are very
large. For some persons say that as they sailed along the coast, they
saw the bones of many oxen, and that it was evident to them that they
had been devoured by the serpents. And as the ships passed on, the
serpents attacked the triremes, and some of them threw themselves upon
one of the triremes and overturned it. There are more lions in Europe,
and especially in the country between the Achelous and the Nessus. In
Asia there are leopards which are not found in Europe.

7. On the whole, the wild animals of Asia are the fiercest, those of
Europe the boldest, and those of Libya the most varied in form; and it
has passed into a proverb that Libya is always producing something new.
For the want of water brings many heterogeneous animals together at
the drinking places, where they copulate and produce young, if their
periods of gestation happen to be the same, and their size not very
different. The desire of drinking makes them gentle to each other, for
they differ from the animals of other countries, in wanting to drink
more in winter than in summer; for on account of the great want of
water during the summer they are habituated to do without water; and if
the mice drink they die.

8. Other animals are produced by the intercourse of heterogeneous
creatures, as in Cyrene the wolves copulate with the dogs, and produce
young; and the Laconian dogs are bred between a dog and a fox. They
say that the Indian dogs are derived from the tiger and the dog; not
directly, but from the third mixture of the breeds; for they say that
the first race was very fierce. They take the dogs and tie them up in
the desert. Many of them are devoured, if the wild animal does not
happen to desire sexual intercourse.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

1. Different localities produce a variety of dispositions, as
mountainous and rough places, or smooth plains. They are more fierce
and robust in appearance in mountains, as the swine of Athos; for the
males of those which inhabit the plains cannot endure even the females
of the other kind: and different situations have great influence on the
bite of wild animals. All the scorpions about Pharus and other places
are not painful, but in Caria and other localities they are frequent,
and large, and fierce, and their sting is fatal to either man or beast,
even to sows, which are but little influenced by the bite of other
creatures, and black sows are more easily affected than others. The
swine die very soon after being stung, if they come near the water.

2. The bite also of serpents varies much; for in Libya the asp is
found, from which they form a septic poison, which is incurable. In the
plant silphium[222] is found a small serpent, for the bite of which
a remedy has been discovered in a small stone, which is taken out of
the tomb of one of the ancient kings: this they drink dipped in wine.
In some parts of Italy the bite of the gecko is found to be fatal. If
one poisonous animal eats another, as, if a viper eats a scorpion,
its bite is the most fatal of all. The saliva of a man is hostile to
most of them. There is one small serpent, which some persons call
hierus, which is avoided even by large serpents. It is a cubit long,
and appears rough. Whatsoever it bites immediately becomes putrid in
a circle round the wound. There is also a small serpent in India, the
only one for which there is no remedy.

[222] Probably assafœtida.


CHAPTER XXIX.

1. Animals also differ in being in good condition or not during
gestation. The testacea, as the pectens and the malacostraca, as the
carabi and such like, are best when pregnant; for this word is also
used of the testacea. For the malacostraca have been observed both in
the act of copulation and oviposition; but none of the testacea have
ever been seen so occupied. The malacia, such as the teuthis, sepia,
and polypus, are most excellent when pregnant; and almost all fish are
good during the early part of the period; but as the time advances some
are good and some not so.

2. The mænis thrives during gestation. The form of the female is round,
that of the male longer and broader. And when the period of gestation
commences in the females, the males become black and variegated, and
are not fit to eat. Some persons call them tragi at this period. Those
which are called cottyphus and cichla also change their colour; and the
caris also changes at this season and some birds, which are black in
spring and afterwards become white.

3. The phycis also changes its colour; for it is white at all other
seasons, and variegated in the spring. This is the only sea fish that,
as they say, makes a nest in which it deposits its ova. The mænis,
as it was before observed, and the smaris also change their colours,
and from being white in summer become black. This is particularly
conspicuous about the fins and gills. The coracinus is best when
pregnant, and so is the mænis. The cestreus, labrax, and nearly all
creatures that swim are inferior at this season.

4. There are a few which are good, whether pregnant or not, as the
glaucus. Old fish also are inferior; and old tunnies are not even fit
for salting, for much of the flesh is dissolved. The same thing also
happens with other fish. The older fish are distinguished by the size
and hardness of their scales; an old tunny has been taken which weighed
fifteen talents, and the length of the tail was two cubits and a span.

5. River and pond fish are most excellent, after depositing their ova
and semen, and recovering their flesh. Some of them, however, are good
while pregnant, as the saperdis; and others bad, as the glanis. In all
the male is better than the female; but the female glanis is better
than the male. Those which they call female eels are better than the
males. They call them females, though they are not so, but only differ
in appearance.




BOOK THE NINTH.


CHAPTER I.

1. The dispositions of obscure and short-lived animals are less easily
observed than those of long-lived animals; for they appear to have a
certain inclination towards each natural affection of the soul, such as
prudence and folly, courage and cowardice, mildness and cruelty, and
such other habits. Some also, which have the sense of hearing, appear
to be capable of a certain degree of instruction and discipline, both
from one another and from mankind, for they not only distinguish the
difference of sounds but also of signs.

2. And in all animals in which there is a distinction of the sexes
nature has given a similar disposition to the males and to the females.
This is most conspicuous in man, and the larger animals, and in
viviparous quadrupeds; for the disposition of the female is softer, and
more tameable and submissive, and more ingenious; as the females of
the Lacedemonian dog are more gentle than the males. In the Molossian
race of dogs, those employed in hunting differ in no respect from other
dogs; while those employed in following sheep are larger and more
fierce in their attack on wild beasts. A mixture of the Molossian and
Lacedemonian races is both braver and more capable of enduring fatigue.

3. The females of all animals are less violent in their passions than
the males, except the female bear and pardalis, for the female of these
appears more courageous than the male. In other animals the females are
more soft and insidious, less simple, more petulant, and more active
in the care of their young. The disposition of the males is opposed to
this; for they are more passionate and fierce, more straightforward,
and less invidious. The vestiges of these dispositions exist, as we may
say, in all, but are more conspicuous in those which have the strongest
moral habits, and most of all in mankind; for the nature of the
human subject is the most complete, so that these habits appear more
conspicuous in mankind than in other animals.

4. Wherefore women are more compassionate and more readily made to
weep, more jealous and querulous, more fond of railing, and more
contentious. The female also is more subject to depression of spirits
and despair than the male. She is also more shameless and false, more
readily deceived, and more mindful of injury, more watchful, more idle,
and on the whole less excitable than the male. On the contrary, the
male is more ready to help, and, as it has been said, more brave than
the female; and even in the malacia, if the sepia is struck with a
trident, the male comes to help the female, but the female makes her
escape if the male is struck.


CHAPTER II.

1. Animals often fight with each other, particularly those which
inhabit the same places and eat the same food; for when food becomes
scarce, congeners fight together. They say that seals which occupy the
same locality will fight, the males with the males and the females
with the females, until one party is either killed or ejected by the
other, and their cubs also will fight in the same way. All animals also
will fight with carnivorous creatures, and these will fight with other
animals, for they feed upon living creatures; for which reason augurs
observe the disputes and agreements of animals, considering that their
disputes betoken war, and their agreements peace with each other.

2. When supplied with plenty of food, animals that are naturally afraid
of man and fierce appear to submit themselves to him, and to conduct
themselves quietly towards each other. The care which is taken of
animals in Egypt demonstrates this circumstance; for even the fiercest
creatures live together, when they have food enough, and are not in any
want; for they become tame from the supply of their wants which they
receive, as the crocodiles are tamed by the priests by the care which
is bestowed on their food. The same thing may be observed in other
countries and in their different parts.

3. The eagle and the dragon are enemies, for the eagle feeds on
serpents. The ichneumon and the spider are also enemies, for the
ichneumon hunts the spider. Among birds the pœcilis and the lark and
the wood-pecker and chloreus are enemies, for they eat each others'
eggs. The crow and the owl also are enemies; for at mid-day the crow,
taking advantage of the dim sight of the owl, secretly seizes and
devours its eggs, and the owl eats those of the crow during the night;
and one of these is master during the day, the other during the night.
The owl and orchilus are enemies; for the latter eats the eggs of the
owl. During the day other birds fly round the owl, which is called
"astonishing it," and as they fly round it pluck off its feathers. For
this reason fowlers use it in hunting for all kinds of birds.

4. The presbys contends with the weasel and crow, for they eat its eggs
and young. The turtle and pyrallis are foes, for their food and mode of
life are the same. The celeus and libyus, kite and raven are enemies;
for the kite, from the superiority of its claws and flight, can take
from the raven anything it may have caught, so that their food is the
cause of their enmity also. Those that obtain their food from the sea
also are foes, as the brenthus, larus, and harpa. The triorches is a
foe to the toad and the serpent; for the triorches eats the others. The
turtle and chloreus are foes, for the chloreus kills the turtle, and
the crow kills the bird called typanus. The little owl and all other
birds with crooked claws eat the calaris, from whence their enmity
arises.

5. The gecko and the spider are enemies, for the gecko eats spiders.
The pipo is a foe to the heron, for it devours the eggs and young of
the heron. Enmity also exists between the ægithus and the ass; for
the ass frequents thorny places, that it may scratch its sores, and
by this means, and when it brays it overturns the eggs and young of
the ægithus, for they fall out of the nest from fear of the noise,
and the bird, to revenge this injury, flies upon the ass and inflicts
wounds. The wolf is the enemy of the ass, bull, and fox; for being a
carnivorous animal, it attacks both oxen, asses, and foxes. The fox and
circus are enemies for the same reason; for the circus having crooked
claws, and being carnivorous, attacks and inflicts wounds with its
claws.

6. The raven is an enemy to the bull and ass, for it flies round them
and strikes their eyes. The eagle and the heron are foes, for the
eagle has crooked claws and attacks it, and the other dies in defending
itself. The æsalon is a foe to the vulture, and the crex to the coleus,
blackbird, and chlorion, which some persons fabulously say derives its
origin from a funeral pile, for it destroys both themselves and their
young. The sitta and trochilus are foes to the eagle, and the eagle, as
well for this reason, as because it is carnivorous, is a foe to them
all.

7. The anthus is the enemy of the horse, for it drives the horse from
its pasture, for the anthus also feeds on grass; it is dim-sighted and
not quick; it imitates the voice of the horse, which it frightens by
flying at it, and drives it from its pasture; if the horse can seize
upon it, he will kill it. The anthus lives near rivers and marshes;
it is of a fine colour, and lives well. The ass attacks the colota, a
creature which lives in the manger, and prevents it from eating, by
making its way into its nostrils.

8. There are three kinds of heron, the black, the white sort, and the
one called asterias; of these, the black rests and copulates with
difficulty, for it utters a cry, and, as they say, bleeds from the eyes
during coition, and the process of parturition is severe and painful;
it attacks creatures which injure it, as the eagle, for it seizes upon
it, and the fox, for this creature attacks it during the night, and the
lark, which steals its eggs.

9. The serpent is an enemy to the weasel and the hog, for if the weasel
and serpent live in the same house they both require the same kind of
food; and swine eat serpents. The æsalon is a foe to the fox, for it
strikes and pecks it, and destroys its young, for it has crooked claws.
The raven and the fox are friendly, for the raven also attacks the
æsalon, and so they help each other in the attack. The little owl and
the æsalon are mutual foes, for both have crooked claws. The little owl
and the swan attack the eagle, and the swan often comes off victorious.
Of all birds the swans are most disposed to devour[223] each other.

[223] To fight with each other.--See Liddell and Scott's Lexicon, s. v.
ἀλληλομάχος.

10. Some animals are always ready to attack each other, and others, as
mankind, only at particular times. The ass and the acanthis are foes,
for the latter feeds entirely on thorns, but the former only when they
are tender. The anthus, acanthis, and ægithus are foes, and it is said
that the blood of the anthus and ægithus will not mix. The crow and
heron are friends, and so are the schœnion, lark, laëdus, and celeus,
for the celeus lives by the side of rivers and thickets, but the laëdus
lives among rocks and mountains, and is fond of the place in which
it lives. The piphinx, harpa, and kite are friends; the fox and the
serpent also, for both live in holes; and the blackbird and the turtle.

11. The lion and jackal are foes, for both are carnivorous, and live
on the same substances. Elephants also fight fiercely with each other,
and strike with their tusks; the conquered submits entirely, and cannot
endure the voice of the victor: and elephants differ much in the
courage they exhibit. The Indians use both male and female elephants
in war, though the females are smaller and far less courageous. The
elephant can overthrow walls by striking them with its large tusks; it
throws down palm trees by striking them with its head, and afterwards
putting its feet upon them, stretches them on the ground.

12. Elephant-hunting is conducted in the following way: men mount
upon some tame courageous animals; when they have seized upon the
wild animals they command the others to beat them till they fail from
fatigue. The elephant-driver then leaps upon its back and directs it
with a lance; very soon after this they become tame and obedient. When
the elephant-drivers mount upon them they all become obedient, but when
they have no driver, some are tame and others not so, and they bind the
fore legs of those that are wild with chains, in order to keep them
quiet. They hunt both full-grown animals and young ones. Such is the
friendship and enmity of these wild animals originating in the supply
of food, and the mode of life.


CHAPTER III.

1. Some fish are gregarious and friendly together, others that are less
gregarious are hostile. Some are gregarious while they are pregnant,
others during the season of parturition. On the whole, the following
are gregarious: the tunny, mœnis, cobius, box, saurus, coracinus,
sinodon, trigla, muræena, anthia, eleginus, atherinus, sarginus,
belona, (mecon,) teuthus, iulus, pelamis, scombrus, and colias. Some
of these are both gregarious, and live in pairs, for all the others
pair together; and some are gregarious at particular seasons, as it
has been said, while they are pregnant, and others in the season of
depositing their ova.

2. The labrax and cestreus, though most hostile, will at certain
seasons congregate with each other, for not only do congeners
congregate together, but all those which feed upon the same kind of
food, where it is abundant. The cestreus and the conger often survive
after having been deprived of their tail up to the anus, for the
cestreus is eaten by the labrax, and the conger by the muræna. The
stronger are hostile to the weaker, for the strong fish eat the others.
This much concerning marine creatures.


CHAPTER IV.

1. It has been already observed, that the dispositions of animals
vary in cowardice, mildness, courage, gentleness, intelligence, and
folly. The disposition of sheep, as I have said before, is foolish, and
without sense; they are the most cowardly of all animals, and steal
away into desert places for no purpose, and in winter often escape
from their fold. When overtaken by a snow-storm, they will not get
away, unless the shepherd drives them, but will stay behind and perish,
unless the shepherds carry off the males, when the rest will follow.

2. If a person takes any of the goats by the beard (which is like
hair), all the rest stand by as if infatuated, and look at it. Sheep
will sleep in colder places than goats, for sheep are more quiet, and
are ready to submit themselves to mankind. Goats do not bear the cold
so well as sheep. Shepherds teach sheep to come together when they make
a noise, and if any of them is left behind and does not join the flock
when it thunders, it will cast its young, if pregnant; wherefore, when
a noise is made, they will collect together in their sheds according to
their custom. (Bulls are destroyed by wild beasts, if they wander away
from their herd.) Sheep and goats lie down to rest separately in their
races, and when the sun begins to descend, the shepherds say that the
goats do not lie down with their faces to each other, but they turn
their backs upon each other.


CHAPTER V.

1. Cows pasture in herds, and in companies, and if one of them wanders
to a distance, all the rest follow, so that the herdsmen, if they do
not find her, immediately examine all the herds. Mares in herds, if
one of them happens to die, will bring up her foal among them, and the
whole race of horses appears to have warm natural affections, of which
the following is a proof: the barren mares will take away the foals
from their mothers, and treat them with affection, though they soon die
for want of milk.


CHAPTER VI.

1. Of all wild quadrupeds, the deer appears to be one of the most
prudent in producing its young by the wayside (where wild beasts do
not come, for fear of men); as soon as the young is born, the dam eats
the chorion, and runs to the plant called seselis, which she eats,
and having so done, returns to her kid. She then leads her kid to the
station, to which it may learn to retreat in case of danger; this is
usually a chasm in a rock with a single entrance, which they say that
it stays and defends. When the male gets fat (which usually happens
in the autumn) he does not show himself, but gets out of the way, for
his fat makes him an easy prey. He sheds his horns in difficult and
scarcely accessible places, from whence arises the proverb, "where the
stag sheds its horns," for they are afraid of being seen, as if they
had lost their means of defence. It is said that the left horn never
has been seen, for he conceals it as if it had some medicinal power.

2. When a year old they have no horns, but only a commencement, as it
were a sign of what is to be; this is short, and covered with thick
down. When two years old, they have straight horns, like sticks, for
which reason they are called pattalia (from παττάλος, a stake). In the
third year their horns are divided. In the fourth year they become
rough. In this manner they are regularly developed till they are six
years old. After this age their horns are always the same, so that
their age cannot be distinguished by them. Old stags, however, are
recognised by two signs; some of them have no teeth at all, others
only a few; and they never have the defensive part of the horn, that
part of the growing horn which bends forwards, with which they defend
themselves, this the old stags never possess, but all the increase of
their horns is upwards.

3. They cast their horns every year about the month of April. When
they cast their horns they hide themselves during the day, as it
has been already observed. They conceal themselves in thickets, to
protect themselves from the flies. During this period they feed (in
the thickets) during the night, until their horns are grown. They are
produced at first under the skin, and are covered with down. When
they grow they expose them to the sun, that the horn may be matured
and hardened. When they cease to give them pain if rubbed against
trees, they leave such places, for they are confident in their means
of defence. An Achaïnian stag[224] has been taken with a considerable
quantity of green ivy growing on its horns as in green wood, for the
horns are tender when first produced.

[224] A bracket, or two year old stag.

4. When the stags are bitten by the phalangium or any such creature,
they collect together a number of crabs and eat them. It appears
to be wholesome for mankind to drink the same substance, but it is
not pleasant. The females, as soon as their young are born, eat the
chorium, and it is not possible to obtain it, for they seize upon it
before it can fall to the ground; it appears to have some medicinal
properties. The females are captured by the sound of the pipe and by
singing, and they are charmed by singing. When two persons go out to
capture them, one shows himself, and either plays upon a pipe, or
sings, and the other strikes behind, when the first gives him the
signal; when the ears of the deer are erect, it hears quickly, and
cannot be deceived, as it may be if they hang down.


CHAPTER VII.

1. When bears are in flight, they drive their cubs before them, or
take them up and carry them. When nearly overtaken, they climb up into
trees. When they first come from their hiding place they eat the arum,
as it has been already observed, and gnaw the trees as if they were
cutting teeth. Many other animals also prudently provide themselves
with remedies, for they say that the wild goats in Crete, when struck
with an arrow, seek out the dittany, for this plant assists in working
the arrow from their body.

2. And dogs, when they are ill, provide themselves with an emetic from
a certain kind of grass. The panther, when it has eaten the poison
called pardalianches,[225] seeks for human ordure, for this relieves
it. This poison also will kill lions, the hunters, therefore, suspend
ordure in a vessel from the trees, in order that the animal may not
wander far from them; for the panther jumps at it and attempts to seize
it, and dies before it can reach it. They say that the panther is aware
that its peculiar scent is grateful to other wild animals, and that it
preys upon them in concealment, and when deer approach near, it catches
hinds.

[225] Perhaps Aconite.

3. The Egyptian ichneumons, when they see the serpent called the asp,
do not attack it until they have invited others to assist. They roll
themselves in mud as a protection against its blows and wounds; they
first bathe in water and then roll themselves on the ground. When the
crocodile gapes, the trochilus flies into its mouth, to cleanse its
teeth; in this process the trochilus procures food, and the other
perceives it, and does not injure it; when the crocodile wishes the
trochilus to leave, it moves its neck that it may not bite the bird.
When the tortoise has eaten a viper, it afterwards eats origanum; this
has been observed. A person who had often seen this done, and had
observed that when the tortoise had tasted the origanum it went back
to the viper, gathered all the origanum, and when this was done, the
tortoise died.

4. The weasel eats the herb rue before it attacks a serpent, for
the smell of this herb is obnoxious to serpents. When the draco has
eaten much fruit, it sucks the juice of the bitter lettuce; it has
been seen to do this. When dogs are troubled with worms, they eat
the green tops of corn. When the pelargus or any other bird has been
wounded in flight, they feed upon marjoram, and many persons have
seen the locust[226] settle upon the neck of serpents with which it
was contending. The weasel also appears prudent in the way in which
it attacks birds, for it kills them in the same manner as wolves kill
sheep; it will fight also with serpents, and especially with those that
hunt mice; for the weasel pursues the same animals.

[226] Spax lacerticida.--_Schneider._

5. Observations have been frequently made on the instinct of the
hedgehog, for when the north and south winds change, those that dwell
in the earth alter the position of the entrance of their burrows; those
which are kept in houses alter their position from wall to wall, so
that they say that in Byzantium there was a person who obtained the
character of predicting the change of the weather, from observations
made on the hedgehog. The ictis is about the size of a small Maltese
dog; in the thickness of its hair, its appearance, its white belly, and
the cunning of its disposition, it resembles the weasel; it is easily
tamed; it attacks hives of bees, for it is very fond of honey; it eats
birds like cats; its penis, as it has been already observed, is bony,
and appears to be a remedy for stranguary in the human subject; it is
administered in shavings.


CHAPTER VIII.

1. Many animals in their mode of life appear to imitate mankind,
and one may observe greater accuracy of intellect in small than in
large animals; as the manufacture of its dwelling by the swallow is
remarkable among birds; it has the same method of combining chaff with
mud, for it mixes the mud with straw, and if mud is not to be found,
it dips in the water and rolls itself in the dust; it uses straw in
making its nest as men use it, for it places the largest at the bottom,
and makes it commensurate with its own bulk; both the male and female
labour in support of the young. They feed each in turn, observing by
some agreement the one which was first fed that none may receive food
twice; at first they turn the dung out of the nest, but as the young
birds increase in size, they teach them to turn themselves, so as to
eject their excrement out of the nest.

2. There are some observations which may be made on pigeons, for
they will not pair with many mates, nor do they forsake their first
companion, unless they become widowed. The care and anxiety of the male
at the time of parturition are remarkable, for if the pain causes the
hen to feel languid when near the nest, he beats her and drives her in.
When the young are hatched, the parent provides salt earth, which is
injected into the open mouth of the young birds, as a preparation for
the reception of food. When it is time for them to leave the nest, the
male copulates with them all.

3. In this manner they have usually a great affection for each other.
Some females will copulate with males that are not their own mates.
This bird is contentious, they fight together, and attack each other's
nests, though not frequently, for although they are beaten when at a
distance, they will fight to the last when near their nests; it appears
to be characteristic of the pigeon, phaps, and turtle not to lean back
when they drink, unless they have had sufficient. The turtle and phatta
always remain faithful to the same male, and will not permit another to
approach them, and the male and female share the labour of incubation.
The male and female are not easily distinguished, except by their
internal structure.

4. The phatta is long-lived, they have been known to live for
twenty-five or thirty years, some even forty years; their claws grow
when they become aged, and pigeon breeders cut them off, and in no
other respect are they inferior when aged. The turtle and the pigeon,
if they have been blinded by those who use them as decoy birds, will
live eight years. The partridge lives fifteen years, the phaps and the
turtle always build in the same places.

5. On the whole, males also live longer than females, but in these
birds they say that the males die before the females; this conclusion
is derived from the observation of those which are brought up in houses
for decoy birds. Some persons say that cock-sparrows only live for one
year, considering this as a proof, that early in the spring there are
no birds with black beneath the chin; but they have it afterwards,
as if none of the former birds had survived. The hen-sparrows have a
longer life, for these are taken among the young birds, and are easily
known by the hard portion about their bills. The turtle lives during
the summer in cold places, and during the winter in warm places. The
finch lives during the summer in warm places, and in cold places during
winter.


CHAPTER IX.

1. The heavy birds do not make nests, for it does not agree with their
mode of flight, as the quail, partridge, and all such birds; but when
they have made a hole in the smooth ground (for they never produce
their young in any other place), they collect together some thorns and
sticks for a defence against the hawks and eagles, and there lay their
eggs and incubate. As soon as the young are hatched, they lead them
out, because their slow flight prevents them from procuring food for
them. The quail and partridge shelter their young under their wings,
like the domestic fowl.

2. They do not lay and incubate in the same place, lest any one should
discover the place while they sat there for a long while; and when any
one in hunting falls upon the nest, the partridge halts before him, as
if she could be taken, and draws him after her in the hopes of capture,
until all the young ones have had time to escape, and after she flies
back and recalls them to their nest. The partridge does not lay less
than ten eggs, and often sixteen. As it has been already observed,
it is a bird of an evil and cunning disposition. In the spring they
separate with singing and fighting into pairs with the females which
each may happen to take. The partridge being a bird of violent
passions, it tries to prevent the female from incubation by rolling
and breaking the eggs, if it can find them. The female, opposing this
artifice by another, lays her eggs as she runs, and often, from her
desire of laying, she drops her eggs wherever she may be, if the male
is present; and, that they may all be preserved, she does not return to
them. If she is observed by men, she leads them away from her eggs as
from her young ones, and shows herself just before them until they are
drawn away from the nest.

3. When the hen has escaped for incubation, the cocks crow and fight
together. These are called widowers. The vanquished in the combat
follows his conqueror who alone has intercourse with him; and if any
one is overcome by a second, or by any chance one, the victor has
secret intercourse with him. This does not take place always, but only
at certain seasons of the year. The quail does the same, and domestic
fowls also; for when a new one is offered in the temples, where they
are kept without the females, all in turn are united with it. Tame
partridges have sexual intercourse with wild ones, and strike and
insult them.

4. The leader of the wild partridges attacks the partridge used in
fowling, and goes out crowing as if he would fight. When he is taken
in the trap, the other goes out and crows in the same manner. If the
partridge used for fowling is a cock, they behave in this way; but if
it is a female, and she calls, the leader answers her call; and all the
rest rise up and beat him, and drive him away from the female, because
he attends to her instead of themselves. For this reason he often comes
silently, that the others may not hear his voice and come out to fight
him. And some experienced fowlers say that the male approaches the
female in silence, that the other males may not hear him and compel him
to fight them. The partridge not only calls, but also utters a shrill
cry and other sounds.

5. And it often happens, when the hen is sitting, that if she sees the
male approaching the decoy bird, she will get up from her nest and
remain in his way, that he may have intercourse with her, and not be
drawn away by the decoy bird. Partridges and quails have such violent
sexual desires that they will fall upon the fowlers and often perch
upon their heads.


CHAPTER X.

1. This is the mode of the sexual intercourse of the partridge, and
the way in which they are caught, and the nature of the rest of their
crafty disposition. Quails, and partridges, and some other birds make
their nest upon the ground, as it has been already observed. Of such
birds the lark, woodcock, and quail do not perch upon trees, but upon
the ground.

2. The woodpecker does not settle upon the ground, but it strikes
trees in order to drive out the worms and flies which they contain,
and it picks them up with its tongue as they emerge. Its tongue is
wide and large. It walks upon the trees in any position, even beneath
the branches, like the gecko. It has claws stronger than those of
the colœus, which provide for its safety in climbing trees; for it
fixes them in the bark as it walks up the trees. There is one kind of
woodpecker less than the blackbird, covered with small red spots, and
another kind larger than the blackbird, and a third kind nearly as
large as the domestic hen. It builds its nest upon trees, as it has
been already observed, both on olive and other trees; and it feeds upon
ants and worms which live in trees. It hunts for worms so diligently
that they say it hollows out the trees so much as to throw them down.
A tame bird has been known to place an almond in a crack in wood, to
prepare it for the stroke of its bill, and break it with three blows,
in order to eat the kernel.


CHAPTER XI.

Many prudent actions appear to be performed by cranes; for they travel
great distances, and fly at a great elevation, in order that they may
see farther; and if they see clouds and wintry weather, they descend
and rest themselves. They have also a leader in front; and in the rear
are those which give a signal by whistling, so that their voice may be
heard. When they settle on the ground, the rest sleep with their head
under the wing, first on one foot, then on the other; but the leader
watches with his neck stretched out, and when he sees anything he gives
a signal by his cry. The pelicans, which inhabit the rivers, swallow
large smooth shells with their drink, and when they have been digested
in the first part of their stomach, they vomit them up, in order that
they may pick out and eat their flesh when they open their valves.


CHAPTER XII.

1. The habitations of wild birds are contrived with relation to their
mode of life and the preservation of their young. Some of them are
kind to their young and careful of them: others are of a different
disposition. Some manage well in their mode of life: others do not.
Some dwell in clefts, and holes, and in rocks, as the birds called
charadrius. This bird is faulty both in its colours and its voice. It
appears during the night, and escapes in the day time.

2. The hawk also builds in precipitous places; and although it is
carnivorous, it does not devour the heart of the bird it has killed.
Some have observed this with respect to the quail and thrush, and
others with other birds. There is also a change in their mode of
hunting their prey, for they do not seize them in the same way in
summer and in winter. It is said that no one has ever seen the young
or the nest of the carrion vulture. Wherefore Herodorus, the father
of Brison the sophist, says that they come from some distant elevated
land, using this proof, that many of them appear suddenly, but where
they come from is not intelligible to any one. The reason is this,
they make their nest in inaccessible rocks, and the bird is not an
inhabitant of many countries. It produces one egg or two at the most.

3. Some birds dwell in mountains and in woods, as the hoopoe and
brenthus. This bird has a good habit of life and a good voice. The
trochilus dwells in thickets and holes. It is taken with difficulty,
for it is swift in flight, and its disposition is weak; but its mode of
life is good, and it is artful. It is also called presbys and basileus.
Wherefore also they say that it fights with the eagle.


CHAPTER XIII.

1. There are some which live near the sea, as the cinclus. In
disposition this bird is cunning and difficult of capture, and when
taken easily tamed. It appears to be lame, for its hinder parts are
weak. All birds with webbed feet live near the sea, or near rivers and
ponds, for their nature teaches them to seek what is advantageous for
them. Many of those with divided feet live near waters and marshes, as
the anthus in the neighbourhood of rivers. Its colour is beautiful,
and its mode of life good. The diver lives near the sea, and when it
plunges into the sea it remains as long a time as it would take a man
to walk over a plethrum of ground. This bird is less than a hawk.

2. The swan also is web-footed, and lives in ponds and marshes. Its
manner of life and disposition is good, and so is its mode of rearing
their young and its old age. If an eagle attacks the swan, it defends
itself and comes off victorious, but will not commence the fight. Swans
have the power of song, especially when near the end of their life; for
they then fly out to sea, and some persons, sailing near the coast of
Libya, have met many of them in the sea singing a mournful song, and
have afterwards seen some of them die.

3. The cymindis is seldom seen, for it inhabits mountains. It is black,
and about the size of the hawk called pigeon hawk. Its form is long and
slight. (It shines with a metallic lustre, wherefore also it is called
chalcis.) The Ionians call it cymindis: wherefore Homer writes in the
Iliad, "the bird which the gods call chalcis, and mortals cymindis."
(Some persons say that the hybris is the same bird as the ptynx.)
This bird does not show itself in the day-time because its sight is
dim; but it hunts its prey during the night like the eagle. It fights
so fiercely with the eagle that both are often taken alive by the
shepherds. It lays two eggs, and builds in rocks and caverns. Cranes
fight so fiercely with each other that these also are taken alive by
the shepherds while they are fighting. The crane lays two eggs.


CHAPTER XIV.

1. The jay changes its voice frequently, for it utters a different one,
as we may say, almost every day; it lays about nine eggs; it makes its
nest upon trees, of hair and wool; when the acorns fall, it conceals
and stores them up. Many persons have reported that the stork is fed
by its young, and some people say the merops also, and that they are
fed by the young, not only in their old age, but as soon as the young
birds are able to do so, and that the parents remain within the nest;
in appearance, this bird is green beneath the wings, and blue above, as
the kingfisher, and its wings are red at the extremity. It lays six or
seven eggs in the autumn, in muddy caverns, and digs as much as four
cubits into the ground.

2. The bird called chloris from being yellow beneath, is of the size of
the lark, and lays four or five eggs; it makes its nest of symphytum,
which it pulls up by the root, and lines it with straw, hair, and
wool. The blackbird and jay do the same, and line their nests with
the same materials; the nest of the acanthyllis is also artfully
constructed, for it is folded together like a ball of flax, and has a
small entrance. And the natives of those places say that there is a
cinnamon bird, and that they bring the cinnamon from the same places
as the bird, and that it makes its nest of it. It builds its nest in
lofty trees and among their branches, but the natives of the country
tip their arrows with lead, with which they destroy the nests, and then
pick out the cinnamon from the other material.


CHAPTER XV.

1. The halcyon is not much larger than a sparrow; its colour is blue
and green, and somewhat purple; its whole body is composed of these
colours as well as the wings and neck, nor is any part without every
one of these colours. Its bill is somewhat yellow, long, and slight;
this is its external form. Its nest resembles the marine balls which
are called halosachnæ,[227] except in colour, for they are red; in
form it resembles those sicyæ (cucumbers) which have long necks; its
size is that of a very large sponge, for some are greater, others
less. They are covered up, and have a thick solid part as well as the
cavity; it is not easily cut with a sharp knife, but when struck or
broken with the hand, it divides readily like the halosachnæ. The mouth
is narrow, as it were a small entrance, so that the sea-water cannot
enter, even if the sea is rough; its cavity is like that of the sponge;
the material of which the nest is composed is disputed, but it appears
to be principally composed of the spines of the belone, for the bird
itself lives on fish. It also ascends rivers; it does not produce more
than five eggs; it continues to reproduce throughout the whole of its
life, from the time of being four months old.

[227] Probably a Zoophyte, Alcyonia.


CHAPTER XVI.

1. The hoopoe generally makes its nest of human ordure. It changes
its appearance in summer and winter, like most other wild birds. The
titmouse, as they say, lays the greatest number of eggs, some say that
the bird called melancoryphus lays the greatest number of eggs after
the Libyan sparrow, seventeen have been observed, but it will produce
more than twenty, and, as they say, it always lays a great many. This
bird also builds in trees, and lives upon worms. It is characteristic
of this bird and the nightingale not to have any tip to their tongue.
The ægithus has a good mode of life, and is careful of its young, but
is lame upon its feet. The chlorion is a clever and diligent bird, but
its flight is difficult, and its colours bad.

2. The elea, like some other birds, has an excellent mode of life, and
dwells during the summer in groves and in the shade, and during the
winter in sunshine, perching upon the reeds on the sides of marshes. It
is a small bird, with a good voice.

3. The bird called gnaphalus has a sweet voice, its colours are
beautiful, its mode of life good, and its form elegant; it appears to
be a foreign bird, for it is rarely found in places where there are no
houses.

4. The disposition of the crex is pugnacious, but it is ingenious in
providing for its own subsistence, though otherwise an unfortunate
bird. The sitta is pugnacious, but its disposition is gentle and
tractable, and its mode of life good. It is said to be medicinal, for
it is skilful in many things. It produces many young, which it treats
with kindness, and obtains its food by striking trees.

5. The little owl feeds during the night, and is rarely visible by day.
It lives in rocks and caverns, for its food is of two kinds; and in
disposition it is diligent and ingenious. There is a small bird called
certhius, which is bold in disposition, and lives on trees and eats the
thrips (timber worm). In disposition it is diligent in search of food,
and its voice is brilliant. The disposition and hue of the acanthis is
bad, but it has a shrill voice.


CHAPTER XVII.

1. Among the herons, as it was before observed, the black heron
copulates with difficulty, but it is an ingenious bird. It carries its
food about, and is skilful in procuring it. It works during the day.
Its colour, however, is bad, and its stomach always fluid. Of the other
two (for there are three kinds of them), the white heron is beautifully
coloured and copulates without pain, and builds its nest and attends
its young carefully in trees. It inhabits marshes and lakes, plains
and meadows. The bittern, which is called ocnus (the idle), is said in
fables to have been originally a slave. Its name indicates its very
idle disposition.

2. The herons live in this manner. The bird called poyx is peculiar,
for it is its disposition to eat the eyes of other creatures, and is
therefore the enemy of the harpa, which lives upon the same food.


CHAPTER XVIII.

1. There are two kinds of cottyphus. The one is black, and is found
everywhere; the other is white. In size they are alike, and their
voice is very similar. The white one is found in Cyllene, in Arcadia,
and nowhere else. The læus is similar to the black cottyphus, but is
rather smaller. It makes its house upon rocks and tiles. It has not a
dark beak, like the blackbird.

2. Of thrushes there are three forms. The one is called misselthrush,
for it lives upon nothing but miseltoe and resin. It is as large as
the citta; the other is called fieldfare. The voice of this bird is
shrill; its size is that of the blackbird. There is another kind, which
some persons call illas, which is smaller than the others and less
variegated.

3. There is a certain bird living on rocks, which is called blue
thrush. This bird generally inhabits Scyrus. It lives upon the wing.
It is less than the blackbird, but larger than the finch. Its feet
are black, and it climbs up upon rocks. It is entirely blue. It has a
smooth, long beak, but its legs are short, and resemble those of the
woodpecker.


CHAPTER XIX.

1. The oriole is entirely of a yellowish green. This bird is not
visible in the winter. It is seen in the greatest numbers at the summer
solstice, and takes its departure when Arcturus rises. It is of the
same size as the turtle. The malacocraneus always perches upon the
same place, and is captured there. This is its appearance: its head
is large, and has the form of cartilage; its size is smaller than the
thrush; its beak is strong, small, and round; its colour is entirely
cinereous; its feet are strong, and its wings weak; it is generally
captured by the owl.

2. There is another bird, called the pardalus, which is generally
gregarious, and a single bird is never seen. Its colour is entirely
cinereous. In size it resembles those already mentioned. Its feet are
strong, and its wings are not weak. Its voice is frequent and not deep.
The collyrion lives on the same food as the blackbird, and in size much
resembles those just named. It is generally taken in the winter. These
birds are visible all the year round, and so are those which live in
the neighbourhood of towns, the raven and crow; for these are always
visible, and neither migrate nor conceal themselves.

3. Of the jackdaw there are three kinds, one called coracias, which is
as large as the crow, and has a red beak; another is called lycius;
there is also a small one called bomolochus; there is also another
kind of jackdaw in Lydia and Phrygia which is web-footed.

4. Of the lark there are two kinds. One dwells on the ground, and has
a crest. The other is gregarious, and not solitary. Its colour is
similar, though it is a smaller bird, and has no crest. It is used for
food.

5. The ascalopas is generally taken in enclosed gardens. It is of the
size of the domestic fowl, it has a long beak, and in colour resembles
the attagen. It runs quickly, and is very partial to the neighbourhood
of mankind. The starling is variegated, and is of the size of the
blackbird.

6. There are two kinds of ibis in Egypt; the white and the black. The
white live in all the rest of Egypt, but are not found in Pelusium. The
black occur in Pelusium, but not in other parts of Egypt.

7. One kind of scops, called brown owl, is seen throughout the year,
but it is not eaten, for it is not fit for food. Others occur sometimes
in the autumn, when they appear for one, or not more than two days.
They are eatable, and are highly esteemed. They differ in no respect
from the brown owl, except in fatness; and they are silent, whereas the
other has a voice. No observations have ever been made on their mode of
generation, except that they appear when the west wind blows. This is
manifest.


CHAPTER XX.

1. The cuckoo, as it has been already observed, makes no nest, but lays
its eggs in the nests of other birds, especially in that of the phaps,
and in those of the sparrow and lark on the ground, and in the nest
of the chloris in trees. It lays one egg, upon which it does not sit,
but the bird in whose nest it lays both hatches the egg and nurses the
young bird; and, as they say, when the young cuckoo grows, it ejects
the other young birds, which thus perish.

2. Others say that the mother bird kills them, and feeds the young
cuckoo with them; for the beauty of the young cuckoo makes her despise
her own offspring. People assert that they have been eye-witnesses of
most of these circumstances, but all are not equally agreed as to the
mode in which the other young birds perish. Some persons say that
the old cuckoo comes and devours the young of the other bird. Others
say that the great size of the young cuckoo enables it to seize upon
the food which is brought to the nest, so that the rest perish from
starvation. Others say that the cuckoo, being the stronger bird, kills
those that are brought up with it.

3. The cuckoo appears to act prudently in thus depositing her egg; for
it is conscious of its own timidity, and that it cannot defend its
young, and therefore places them under the protection of another bird,
in order that they may be preserved; for this bird is very cowardly,
and when it is pecked by even small birds, it flies away from them.


CHAPTER XXI.

1. That the swift, which some persons call cypsellus, resembles the
swallow, has been already observed, and it is not easy to distinguish
them apart, except that the legs of the apos are covered with feathers.
These birds rear their young in small nests made of mud, which have a
passage sufficient for their admission. The nest is constructed in a
narrow place under rocks and caverns, so that it avoids both beasts and
men.

2. The goatsucker, as it is called, is a mountain bird, larger than
the blackbird, and less than the cuckoo. It lays two, or not more than
three eggs, and is slothful in its disposition. It flies against the
goats and sucks them, whence its name (ægothelas, the goat-sucker).
They say that when the udder has been sucked that it gives no more
milk, and that the goat becomes blind. This bird is not quick sighted
by day, but sees well at night.

3. The ravens in small districts, and where they have not food enough,
are found only in pairs; and as soon as their young birds are able to
fly, the old birds first of all turn them out of the nest, and then
drive them from the place. The raven lays four or five eggs. When
the hired soldiers of Medias perished in Pharsalus, Athens and the
Peloponnesus were deserted by the ravens, as if they had some means of
communication with each other.


CHAPTER XXII.

1. There are several kinds of eagles. One which is called pygargus
(hen-harrier), which is found in plains and groves, and in the
vicinity of towns. Some persons call it nebrophonus. It is a courageous
bird, and flies to mountains, and woods also. The other kinds rarely
appear in plains and groves. There is another kind of eagle called
plangus, the second in point of size and strength, which lives among
thickets, and valleys, and marshes. It is called nettophonus and
morphnus. Of this kind Homer speaks at the departure of Priam.

2. There is another kind, which is black. It is smaller, and stronger
than the others. It inhabits mountains and woods. It is called
melanæetus, and lagophonus. This is the only one that rears and
educates its young. It is swift, elegant, liberal, fearless, warlike,
and of a good omen, for it neither cries nor screams. There is another
kind with spotted wings. It has a white head, and is the largest of all
eagles. Its wings are short, and its rump very long, like the vulture;
it is called oreipelargus, and hypæetus. It inhabits groves. It has all
the faults of the rest, and none of their good qualities; for it is
taken and pursued by ravens and other birds. It is a heavy bird, and
its mode of life is bad. It carries about dead creatures; it is always
hungry, and screams and cries.

3. There is another kind of eagle called sea eagle, which has a long
and thick neck, curved wings, and a wide rump. It inhabits the sea and
the coast. When they have seized their prey, and cannot carry it away,
they are borne down into the sea. There is, again, another kind of
eagle, called true eagle. They say that these alone of all other birds
are true, for the other kinds are mixed and crossed with each other,
both eagles, hawks, and other smaller kinds. This is the largest of all
the eagles, greater than the phene; one and a half times as large as
other eagles, and of a red colour: it is seldom seen, like that called
cymindis.

4. The time for the activity of the eagle, and for its flight, is from
dinner till the evening, for it sits aloft till the time when the
market-place begins to fill. When eagles grow old, their beaks become
more and more curved, so that at last they die of famine. The story
goes, that the eagle was once a man, and suffers this as a punishment
for inhospitality to a guest. Any superabundant food is put aside for
their young in their nests, for it is not easy for them to procure it
every day, and sometimes they have no place from whence to bring it.

5. If they find anyone attempting to take their nest, they beat them
with their wings, and tear them with their claws. They do not make
their nests in plains, but in high places, especially in precipitous
rocks, but never on trees. They rear their young till they can fly, and
then turn them out of their nests, and drive them to a great distance;
for one pair of eagles occupies a wide space of country, so that they
will suffer no others to live near them.

6. They do not hunt their prey near their nests, but at a considerable
distance; and when they have hunted and taken anything, they lay it
down and do not take it away at once, but carry it away when they have
tried its weight. They do not capture hares at once, but let them
escape to the plain. They do not descend to the plain at once, but with
large though gradually decreasing circles. They do this in order that
they may not be ensnared. They settle upon eminences, because they
cannot rise easily from the ground. They fly aloft, that they may see
the greater extent of country. For this cause men say that the eagle is
the only divine bird.

7. All birds with crooked claws avoid sitting upon rocks, for its
hardness is injurious to their claws. The eagle hunts fawns, hares, and
other animals which it is able to conquer. It is a long-lived bird.
This is plain from the long continuance of their nests in the same
place.

8. In Scythia there is a kind of bird as large as a bustard, which
produces two young ones. It does not sit upon its eggs, but hides them
in the skin of a hare or fox. It watches them from a neighbouring tree
all the while it is not engaged in hunting its prey. And if anyone
approaches them, it fights and strikes with its wings, like the eagle.


CHAPTER XXIII.

1. The owl and nycticorax, and the other birds which see imperfectly by
daylight, procure their food by hunting in the night. They do not this
all the night, but in twilight and at early dawn. They hunt mice, and
lizards, and beetles, and such other small animals.

2. The bird called asprey produces many young, is of a good habit
of body, diligent in search of food, and gentle; and feeds both its
own young and those of the eagle: for when the eagle turns out its
young, the phene takes them up and feeds them; for the eagle ejects
them before the proper time, when they still require feeding, and are
unable to fly. The eagle appears to eject its young from the nest from
envy; for it is an envious and hungry bird, and not quick in seizing
its prey. It captures large creatures when it can. When its young have
grown, it envies them, for they are good for food, and tears them with
its claws. The young also fight in the nest for particular places, and
for the food. The parent then turns them out of the nest and strikes
them. When they are turned out they begin to scream, and the phene
comes and takes them up. The phene is dim-sighted, and its eyes are
imperfect.

3. The sea-eagle is very quick-sighted, and compels its young to gaze
on the sun before they are feathered. If anyone of them refuse, it is
beaten and turned round: and the one of them which first weeps when
gazing on the sun is killed, the other is reared. It lives near the sea
side, and obtains its food by pursuing marine birds, as it was before
remarked. It pursues and takes them one at a time, watching them as
they emerge from the sea. And if the bird, as it rises, sees the eagle
watching it, it dives again from fear, in order that it may rise again
in another place: but the eagle's quick sight enables him to pursue the
bird till it is either suffocated, or taken on the wing; but it never
attacks them in any numbers, for they drive it away by sprinkling it
with their wings.

4. The petrels are taken with foam, for they devour it. They are
therefore taken by sprinkling them. All the rest of its flesh is good;
the rump alone smells of seaweed, and they are fat.


CHAPTER XXIV.

1. The buzzard is the strongest of the hawks; next to this the merlin.
The circus is less strong; the asterias and phassophonus, and pternis
are different. The wide-winged hawks are called hypotriorches, others
are called perci and spiziæ; others are the eleii and the phrynolochi;
these birds live very easily, and fly near the ground.

2. Some persons say that there are no less than ten kinds of hawks;
they differ from each other, for some of them kill the pigeon as
it perches on the ground, and carry it away, but do not touch it in
flight; others attack it as it sits upon the trees, or in some such
situation, but will not touch it when upon the ground or in flight;
other kinds of hawks will not strike the bird when perching upon the
ground or anywhere else, but will endeavour to attack it when in flight.

3. They say that the pigeons can distinguish each of these kinds, so
that if they see one of those which attack them in the air flying
towards them, they remain sitting where they are, but if it is one of
those which strike them on the ground, they do not remain still, but
fly away.

4. In the city of Thrace, formerly called Cedropolis, men are assisted
by hawks in pursuing birds in the marshes. They strike the reeds and
wood with sticks in order that the birds may fly up, and the hawks
appearing above pursue them, the birds then fall to the earth through
fear, when the men strike them with their sticks and take them, and
divide the prey with the hawks, for they throw away some of the birds,
and the hawks come and take them.

5. On the Palus Mœotis, they say that wolves are accustomed to assist
the fishermen in their calling, and if they do not give them their
share of the food, they destroy the nets that are laid to dry on the
ground. This, then, is the nature of birds.


CHAPTER XXV.

1. Marine animals also have many artful ways of procuring their food,
for the stories that are told of the batrachus, which is called the
fisher, are true, and so are those of the narce. For the batrachus
has appendages above its eyes, of the length of a hair, with a round
extremity to each like a bait; it buries itself in the sand or mud,
and raises these appendages above the surface, and when the small fish
strike them, it draws them down, till it brings the fish within reach
of its mouth.

2. The narce stupefies any fish it may wish to master, with the
peculiar force which it has in its body, and then takes and feeds upon
them; it lies concealed in sand and mud, and captures as they swim
over it any fish that it can take and stupefy; of this circumstance
many persons have been witnesses; the trygon also hides itself, but not
in the same manner; the following is a proof of their mode of life, for
they are often taken with the cestreus in their stomach, which is the
swiftest of fishes, and they are the slowest; and the batrachus, when
nothing is left on the hair-like appendages, is taken in an emaciated
condition. The narce also has plainly caused stupefaction in men.

3. The onus, batus, psetta, and rhine also bury themselves in the sand,
and when they have hidden themselves, the appendage which is in their
mouth stands up, this the fishermen call their staff, and the small
fish approach it as if it was the sea-weed, on which they usually live.
Wherever the anthias is found there are no obnoxious creatures; when
this sign is observed, those who collect sponges dive for them there,
and call the anthias the sacred fish; this is only a coincidence, just
as the pig and partridge are never found where there are snails, for
they eat them all.

4. The marine-serpent, in colour and in the form of its body, resembles
the conger, but it is darker, and more powerful. If it is captured
and allowed to escape, it buries itself in the sand, which it pierces
with its snout, for its snout is sharper than that of a serpent. The
creature called scolopendra when it has swallowed the hook turns itself
inside out, till the hook is ejected, when it turns to its original
form. The scolopendra, like that which inhabits the land, is attracted
by the smell of cooked meat; it does not bite with the mouth, but
stings with the contact of the whole body, like the creatures called
sea-nettles.

5. The fish called alopex, when one of them has swallowed the hook,
assist each other in this matter, as the scolopendra also does, for
they collect together round the line and bite it off; in some places,
where the water is swift and deep, they are taken with many hooks
in them. The amiæ also collect together when they see any obnoxious
creature near them, and the largest swim round them in a circle; when
attacked, they defend themselves; they have strong teeth, and the lamia
and other creatures when attacking them have been seen to be repulsed
with wounds.

6. Among river fish the male glanis is very careful of his young fry,
but the female goes away as soon as she has deposited her ova, but the
male continues to watch by the greater number of the ova, paying them
no more attention than to drive away other fish, that they may not
carry away the ova; he is thus employed for forty or fifty days until
the young fry are so far grown that they can escape from other fish;
the fishermen know when it is guarding its ova, for it drives away
other fish, and as it jumps at them it makes a noise and a murmur. It
remains with such affection beside its ova, that if they are deposited
in deep water, and the fishermen attempt to bring them into shallow
water, the fish will not forsake them; but if young it is easily taken
with a hook, from its habit of seizing upon any fish that may come in
its way; but if it is experienced, and has swallowed a hook before,
it does not leave its ova, but with its hard teeth it will bite and
destroy the hook.

7. All creatures with fins, and stationary animals, inhabit either
the places in which they were born, or similar localities, for their
peculiar food is found in such places. The carnivorous fish are the
greatest wanderers; all are carnivorous with a few exceptions, as the
cestreus, salpa, trigla, and chalcis. The mucous substance which the
pholis emits forms around it, and resembles a chamber. Of the apodal
testacea, the pecten is the most locomotive, for it flies by means of
its own valves; the purpura and its congeners advance very slowly.

8. All the fish except the cobius leave the Pyrrhic Euripus during the
winter on account of the cold, for the Euripus is colder than the sea,
and return again in the spring. In the Euripus the scarus, the thrissa,
all the thorny fish, the galus, acanthia, carabus, polypus, bolitæna,
and some others are wanting, and of those that are produced in the
Euripus, the white cobius is not an inhabitant of the sea. Those fish
which have ova are in the highest season in the spring, before they
produce their ova; those that are viviparous in the autumn, and besides
these the cestreus, trigla, and their congeners. In the neighbourhood
of Lesbos, both the marine fish and those of the Euripus produce their
ova in the Euripus; they copulate in the autumn, and deposit their ova
in the spring. The males and females of the selachea also mix together,
in numbers, in the autumn, for the purpose of copulation; but in the
spring they separate until they have produced their young; at the
period of sexual intercourse, they are often taken united together.

9. The sepia is the most cunning of the malacia, and is the only one
which uses its ink for the purpose of concealment, when it is not
alarmed. The polypus and teuthis emit their ink only when alarmed.
These creatures never emit all their ink, and as soon as it is emitted
it is secreted again. But the sepia, as it has already been remarked,
makes use of its ink for the purposes of concealment, and when it
pretends to advance, it returns into its ink. With its long extended
tentacula it not only pursues small fish, but frequently attacks the
cestreus. The polypus is a foolish creature, for it will approach a
man's hand if brought near it. It is an economical animal, for it
collects all its prey in the hole in which it dwells, and when the most
useful part has been consumed, it ejects the shells, the coverings of
the cancri, and conchylia, and the spines of the fish, it pursues any
fish that may come in its way, changing its colour and imitating that
of any neighbouring stone. It does the same thing when alarmed.

10. Some persons say that the sepia has power to do the same thing,
and that it can imitate the colour of the place it inhabits. The rhine
is the only fish endowed with the same power, for it can change its
colours like the polypus. The polypus rarely lives for two years,
for it is by nature subject to decay. This is a proof of it, that
when pressed, this animal always emits something, until at last it
consumes away. The females suffer so much from this in the period of
parturition, as to become foolish, and not perceive any agitation of
the waves, so that they are easily taken by the hand of the diver; they
become like mucus, and are not able to pursue their prey.

11. The males become hard and shining. This appears to be a proof
that they do not survive a year, that in the summer and autumn, after
the production of the young, it is difficult to find a large polypus,
though large ones were abundant a short time before; when they have
produced their ova, they say that both sexes grow old and become so
weak, that they are devoured by small fish, and are easily dragged out
of their holes, though before they would have permitted nothing of the
kind. They also say that the small and young ones will not endure this,
and that they are stronger than the large ones. The sepia also only
lives one year; the polypus is the only one of the malacia that ever
ventures upon dry land, it advances upon a rough surface, but avoids
smooth places. In other respects, it is a strong animal, but its neck,
if pressed, becomes very weak.

12. This is the nature of the malacia. They say that ... form their
rough shells round themselves like a hard breastplate, which increases
as they grow, and that they can leave these, as if they were a hole or
a habitation. The nautilus is a polypus peculiar both in its nature
and its actions; for it sails upon the surface of the sea, rising up
from the depths of the waters. It is brought to the surface with its
shell inverted, in order that it may go out more easily and navigate in
an empty shell. When it reaches the surface, it turns its shell over.
There is a membrane extended between two of its tentacula similar to
the web feet of birds, except that theirs is thick and that of the
nautilus thin and like a spider's web. This it uses for a sail when
the wind blows, and it extends two of its tentacula for rudders. If
alarmed, it fills its shell and sinks in the sea. No one has made any
accurate observation on the production and growth of the shell. It
appears not to originate in sexual intercourse, but to be produced like
that of other conchylia, nor is it clear whether it can live when taken
out of its shell.


CHAPTER XXVI.

1. The most laborious of all insects, if compared with the rest, are
the tribes of ants and bees, with the hornets, wasps, and their other
congeners. Some of the spiders are more neat, graceful, and skilful
than others in their mode of life. Every one may see the diligence of
the ant; for it is on the surface, and that they always travel in one
direction, and make a store and treasure-house of food, for they work
even in the night when there is a full moon.

2. There are many kinds of spiders and phalangia. Of the phalangia that
bite there are two sorts. The one resembles those called wolves. It is
small, variegated, sharp, and active in jumping. It is called psylla.
The other is larger. Its colour is black, and its fore-legs are long.
Its movements are slow, and it can scarcely walk. It is not strong,
nor capable of jumping. The other kinds, which the dealers in medicine
offer for sale, either do not bite at all, or very slightly.

3. There is another kind of those called wolves. One is small, and
makes no web, and the larger sort makes a coarse inferior web upon the
ground or in hedges. It always makes its web over chinks in the soil,
and with the origin of the web in the interior it keeps guard until
something falls into the web and moves it, when it comes out. The
variegated kind makes a small inferior web among trees.

4. There is another third kind, which is very skilful and graceful.
It commences the process of weaving by extending its web to the
extremities on all sides, and then it draws a thread from the centre,
and takes up the centre correctly. Upon these threads it weaves, as it
were, the woof, and then weaves them altogether. Its sleeping place and
store-room are situated at a distance. In seeking its prey it watches
in the middle of its web. When anything falls into the web and the
centre is moved, the spider surrounds and encloses it in a web, until
it is rendered powerless, and then takes it up and carries it to her
store. If hungry, she sucks it, for this is their method of enjoyment;
and if not hungry, hastens back for the pursuit of more prey, and in
the first place mends her broken web.

5. If anything in the meanwhile has fallen into the web, she first goes
to the centre, and from that point, as before, falls upon her victim.
If anyone destroys the web, she begins spinning again at the rising or
setting of the sun, for it is at this time that her prey usually falls
into the web. The female both makes the web and pursues the prey. The
male only enjoys it with her.

6. There are two kinds of graceful spiders that spin a thick web, one
large and one small. The one with long legs keeps watch suspended
above its web, that the creatures which fall into the web may not be
frightened when taken, and then it falls upon them from above, for its
size prevents it from being easily concealed. But the smaller kind
conceals itself in a small superior chamber of the web.

7. Spiders have the power of emitting their web as soon as they are
born, not from within their bodies, as if it were an excrement, as
Democritus says, but from the surface of their body, like the bark of
a tree, or like the ejected spines of some animals, as the porcupine.
They will attack and surround with their web animals larger than
themselves; for they will attack small lizards, and beginning at the
mouth, will emit the web until their mouth is covered, and then will
approach and bite them. This is the nature of these animals.


CHAPTER XXVII.

1. There is a tribe of insects which has not yet received any name,
although in form all the species resemble each other. This tribe
includes those that form wax, as the bee and those which resemble it
in shape. Of these there are nine sorts, six of which are gregarious,
the bee, the king bee, the drone, which dwells among the bees, the
annual wasp, the hornet, and tenthredo. These are solitary, the small
siren, of a tawny colour, and another siren, which is large, black, and
variegated. The third, which is larger than these, is called bombylius.
The ants pursue no prey, but only collect that which is already found.
The spiders do not make anything, nor lay up a store, but only hunt
down their prey.

2. Of the rest of the nine kinds already mentioned we will treat
hereafter. The bees do not hunt for prey, but they both produce and
lay up stores. The honey is their food. This is plainly shown when
the honey dealers attempt to take the combs. When they are fumigated
and suffering from the effects of the smoke, they devour the honey
greedily, which they are not observed to do at other times; but they
spare it and store it up for food. They have also another kind of food,
which is called cerinthus (bee bread), which is of an inferior quality,
and sweet like figs. They carry this upon their legs as they do the wax.

3. There is great variety in their diligence and mode of life. For
when a clean hive is given them, they build their combs, bringing the
drops from flowers and trees, such as the willow, the elm, and other
glutinous trees. With this also they smear the floor of their hive,
for fear of other creatures. The honey dealers calls this substance
commosis, and they build up the entrance of their hive if it is too
wide. They first build cells for their own habitation, then those for
the kings and the drones. They always build cells for themselves, and
royal cells when there are many young; but they only build cells for
the drones when there is plenty of honey.

4. They make the royal cells near their own. These are small. Those
for the drones are placed next. These are of a smaller size than those
of the bees. They commence the formation of their combs from the top
of the hives, and carry them down until several reach the floor of the
hive. The cells, whether for the honey or the grubs, are constructed
with two mouths; for there are two cells built on each base, like a
double cup, one on the inside, the other on the outside. The cells at
the beginning of the comb, near the hives, are joined together for as
much as two or three rows in a circle, and are short, and contain no
honey. The cells which are formed with the greatest quantity of wax
contain the most honey.

5. They spread the substance called mitys at the entrance of their
hives, near the opening. This material is black, as if it was the
purification of the wax, and of a harsh smell. It is considered a
remedy for contusions and suppurations. Next to this the pissocerus
is smeared over the floor of the hive. This substance is less useful
than the mitys in the healing art. Some persons say that the drones
build cells for themselves, dividing both the hive and the wax with
the bees; but they make no honey, but both themselves and their young
are supported by that of the bees. The drones generally remain in the
hives; and if they fly out they rise in the air with a great noise,
wheeling about as if they were exercising; and when they have done this
they return to the hive and feast themselves on the honey.

6. The king bees never leave the hives, either for food or any other
purpose, except with the whole swarm; and they say that, if a swarm
wanders to a distance, they will retrace their steps and return until
they find the king by his peculiar scent. They say also that, when the
king is unable to fly, he is carried by the swarm; and if he perishes,
the whole swarm dies with him. And if they continue for a time to form
cells, they place no honey in them, and then they also perish.

7. The bees collect the wax by climbing actively on the flowers with
their fore feet. They cleanse these upon the middle pair of legs, and
their middle legs again on the curved part of their hind legs, and thus
loaded they fly away. They are evidently heavily loaded. During each
flight the bee does not settle upon flowers of different kinds, but as
it were from violet to violet, and touches no other species till it
returns to the hive. There they are unloaded, and two or three bees
follow every one on its return to the hive. It is not easy to see what
is taken, nor has their manner of working it been ever observed. Their
manner of collecting wax upon the olive trees has been the subject of
observation; for the thickness of the leaves makes them remain a long
while in this tree.

8. After having done this they produce their young. There is nothing to
prevent there being grubs, and honey, and drones in the same comb. As
long as the king bee is alive, they say that the drones are produced
in a separate place; but when he is dead they are produced by the bees
in their own cells, and such drones are more passionate: for this
cause they are called stingers, not that they have any sting, but that
they would sting, if they had the power to do so. The drone cells are
larger. Sometimes the drone cells are placed by themselves, but are
generally combined with those of bees, for which reason they cut them
off.

9. There are several kinds of bees, as has been already observed: two
kinds of kings, the better sort of which is red, and the other sort
is black and variegated, and in size double that of a good bee. The
best kind is small, round, and variegated; the other is long, like the
wild bee. There is another called phor (the thief); it is black, and
has a broad abdomen. The drone is another sort: it is the largest of
them all, has no sting, and is stupid. The bees that are produced from
those that inhabit cultivated places are different from the natives
of mountainous countries, for those produced from wood bees are more
hairy, smaller, less, more diligent, and more violent. The best bees
elaborate a smooth comb, with a polished surface. The comb also is of
one form, as if entirely adapted for honey, or for grubs, or drones;
and if it happens that all these are produced in the same comb, each
form will be elaborated in order.

10. The long bees make their combs uneven, and the covering swollen,
like that of the wild bee. Their offspring, also, and the rest of their
productions, are not arranged in any order, but according to chance.
Among them there are many bad kings, and many drones, and thieves, as
they are called; but little or no honey. The bees sit upon the combs,
in order to bring them to maturity. If this is not done, they say that
the cells perish and become filled with a web; but if afterwards they
are able to continue sitting, something like an abortion is produced:
if they cannot sit, the whole perishes. Maggots are formed in those
cells that perish, which acquire wings and fly away. If a comb falls
down, the bees set it up, and put props beneath it, in order that they
may be able to pass underneath; for if they have no path by which to
approach the place where they sit, the cells become covered with a web.

11. The thieves and the drones do not work, but only injure the other
bees, and when taken they are killed by the useful bees. Many of their
rulers are also frequently killed, and especially the bad ones, in
order that the swarm may not be dispersed by their numbers. They are
the more disposed to kill them when the swarm is not fruitful, and no
casts are formed. At such times they destroy the royal cells, if any
have been prepared, for they are the leaders of the swarm. They destroy
also those of the drones, if honey is scarce, or the swarm is short of
honey. They fight boldly for their honey with those that would take it
from them, and drive out any drones that may be in the hive, and are
often seen sitting upon the hives.

12. The small bees fight eagerly with the long kind, and endeavour
to drive them from their hives: and if they prevail, it seems to be
a sign of a very strong swarm; but if the others conquer, when left
alone, they are idle, and do nothing that comes to good, but perish in
the course of the autumn. Whenever the useful bees kill any of them,
they endeavour to do so outside of the hive; and if any of them die in
the hive, they carry them out. Those which are called thieves injure
their own combs, and if they can do it in secret, they will enter those
of other bees, but if discovered they are killed. It is, however,
difficult to enter unperceived, for there are guards placed at each
entrance; and if one contrives to enter unnoticed, he is unable to fly
from repletion, and is rolled out before the whole swarm; so that it is
difficult to escape.

13. The kings themselves are never seen out of the hives, except with
a young swarm, and in young swarms all the rest appear to be collected
round him. When a swarm is about to separate, a peculiar and singular
noise is made for some days, and for two or three days beforehand a
few bees are seen flying round the hive; and if the king is among
them he is not seen, for it is not easy to see him. And when they are
collected, all the rest fly away and separate themselves with their
respective kings: and if a few of them happen to be near at hand, they
join themselves with one of the numerous swarms. And if the king that
they have left follows them, they kill him. This is the manner of their
leaving the hive, and of swarming.

14. They all have their proper work to perform. Some bring flowers,
others water, and others polish and erect the cells. Water is brought
when they are rearing their young. None of them ever settle upon flesh,
nor will they eat anything seasoned. They have no particular time for
commencing work, but when they are properly supplied, and in good
health, they are particularly diligent during the summer. When the day
is fine they work without ceasing, and as soon as the young bees are
three days old, they set to work, if properly fed. And when the swarm
settles some depart for food, and afterwards return. In healthy swarms
the progeny of the bees only cease from reproduction[228] for about
forty days after the winter solstice. As soon as the young bees are
grown, they offer them food, and smear the cells with it, and as soon
as they are strong enough, the young bees rupture the covering of the
cell, and so escape.

[228] This should probably be read "the bees only cease from their work
for forty days during the winter solstice."

15. The good kinds of bees destroy any creatures that are produced
in their hives and destroy the combs; but the other kinds from their
inferiority overlook the destruction of their work. When the dealers
in honey take the combs, they leave the bees some food for the winter.
If sufficient is left, the swarm is preserved; but if not, they either
die in the winter, or, if the weather continues fine, desert the
hive. They eat honey both in summer and in winter. They also lay up
another kind of food, which is as hard as wax, which some persons call
sandarache.

16. Wasps are very injurious to them, and so is the bird called
titmouse, and the swallow, and merops. The frogs also in marshes
destroy them when they come for water, for which reason bee-fanciers
destroy the frogs in those marshes where the bees come for water. They
also destroy wasps' nests, and the nest of the swallow and merops, if
near the swarms of bees. They avoid no animal, except those of their
own kind. They fight among themselves, and with the wasps. When at a
distance from their hives they will neither injure each other, nor any
other creature; but when near at home they will destroy everything that
they can conquer.

17. When they have stung anything they perish, for they cannot withdraw
their sting from the wound without tearing their own entrails; but they
are frequently saved, if the person stung will take care to press the
sting from the wound: but when its sting is lost, the bee must perish.
They will kill even large animals with their stings, and a horse has
been known to perish, if attacked by bees. The rulers are the least
cruel and stinging.

18. If any bees die in the hive, they carry them out; and in other
respects the bee is a very clean creature. For this reason they also
eject their excrement when in flight, for the smell is bad. It has
been already observed that they dislike bad smells and the scent of
unguents, and that they sting persons who use such things. They also
die from other causes, as when the rulers in the hive are in great
numbers, and each leads out a portion of the swarm. The toad also
destroys bees, for it blows into the entrance of the hive, and watches
for and destroys them as they fly out. The bees cannot inflict any
injury upon it, but their keepers destroy it.

19. Some bee-keepers say that the kind of bee which makes an inferior
and rough comb is the young of the others, and that it is the result
of imperfect skill. They are young when a year old; young bees do not
sting so severely as old bees; for this reason the swarms are carried
to the apiaries, for they are those of young bees. When honey is short
they eject the drones, and put figs and other sweet things near them.
The elder bees work in the hives, and become hairy from remaining
within. The younger ones go out in the fields, and are smoother: and
they kill the drones when they have no longer any room for them, for
they are placed in a recess of the hive. When a swarm has been weak,
strange bees have been known to come and fight with them, and take away
their honey; and when the bee-keeper killed them the others came out
and defended themselves, and would not injure the man.

20. Other diseases, and especially one called clerus, frequently attack
strong swarms. In this disease small worms are produced on the floor of
the hive, and as these increase, the whole swarm is held, as it were,
in a spider's web, and the combs decay. There is another disease, which
is like a wildness in the bees, and causes a strong smell in the hives.
The bees should be fed on thyme, the white sort is better than the red.
In close weather they should have a cool place, and a warm one in the
winter. They suffer the most when they work with materials affected
with the rust.

21. When the wind is high, they carry a stone with them for a balance.
If a river is at hand they never drink anywhere else, first of all
laying down their weight. If no river is near, they drink in some other
place, and then vomit up their honey, and again set to work. There are
two seasons for making honey, the spring and autumn. That formed in the
spring is sweeter, whiter, and, on the whole, better than that formed
in autumn. The best honey is made from the new wax and young flowers.
The red honey is inferior, on account of the wax; for, like wine, it is
injured by the vessel which contains it; this honey therefore should be
dried up. When the thyme is in flower, and the comb is full of honey,
it does not become inspissated. The gold-coloured honey is also good.
The white honey is not formed of pure thyme, but is good for the eyes,
and for wounds. Weak honey always floats on the surface, and ought to
be separated. The pure honey is beneath.

22. When the woods are in flower the bees form wax; at this season,
therefore, the wax ought to be taken from the hive, for they
immediately make more. These are the plants from which they collect it,
atractyllis, melilot, asphodel, myrtle, phleos, agnus, broom. When they
can procure thyme, they mix water with it before they smear the cells.
All the bees emit their excrements either on the wing, as it has been
said before, or into a single cell. The small bees, it has been already
remarked, are more industrious than the large ones, so that their wings
become worn at the edges, and their colour black and burnt, but the
bright and shiny bees are idle, like women.

23. Bees also appear to have pleasure in noises, so that they say that
they collect them into their hives by striking earthen vessels and
making noises. But it is very doubtful whether they hear or not, and if
they hear, whether they collect together from pleasure or from fear.
The bees drive out all that are idle or wasteful. They divide the work,
as it has been already said; some work at the honey, others at the
grubs, and others at the bee bread; some, again, form the comb, others
carry water to the cells, and mix it with the honey, while others go to
work. Early in the morning they are silent, until one bee arouses them
by humming two or three times, when they all fly to their work; when
they return again there is some disturbance at first, which gradually
becomes less, until one of them flies round with a humming noise, as if
warning them to sleep, when on a sudden they all become silent.

24. It is a sign that the swarm is strong when there is much noise
and movement, as they leave and return to the hive, for they are then
busy with the grubs. They are most hungry when they begin to work
after winter. They are more idle if the person who takes the honey
leaves much behind, but it is necessary that a quantity should be
left proportionable to the strength of the swarm, for they work less
actively if too little is left; they become more idle if the hive is
large, for they despair of their labour. The hive is deprived of a
measure or a measure and a half of honey; if it is strong, two or two
measures and a half. Some few will afford three measures.

25. Sheep and wasps, as it was said above, are hostile to bees. The
bee fanciers, therefore, catch the wasps in pans, in which they place
pieces of flesh; when many have fallen in, they put on a lid and put
them in the fire. It is good for the bees to have a few drones among
them, for it makes them more industrious. Bees discern the approach of
cold weather and of rain; this is plain, for they will not leave the
hive, but even if the day is fine are occupied in the hive. By this the
bee keepers know that they expect severe weather.

26. When they are suspended upon each other in the hive, it is a sign
that the swarm is about to leave; and when the bee keepers see this,
they sprinkle them with sweet wine. They usually plant about the hive
the achras, beans, poa medica, syria, ochrus, myrtle, poppy, herypllus,
almond. Some bee keepers recognize their own bees in the fields by
sprinkling them with flour. When the spring is late or dry, and when
rust is about, the bees are less diligent about their young. This,
then, is the nature of bees.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

1. There are two kinds of wasps, of which the wild sort are rare; they
are found in mountains, and do not build their nest in the ground,
but on oak trees; in form they are larger, longer, and darker than
the other sort; they are variegated, all of them have stings, and
are strong, and their sting is more painful than that of the other
sorts, for their sting is larger in proportion to their size. These
live for two years, and in winter are observed to fly out of trees,
when they are cut down; during winter they live in holes. Their place
of concealment is in trees; some of them are mother wasps, and some
workers, as in those which are more domestic; the nature of the workers
and the mother wasps will be explained when we come to speak of the
more domestic kind.

2. For there are two kinds of the domestic wasps, the rulers, which
they call mother wasps, and the workers; the rulers are larger and more
gentle, and the workers do not survive the year, but all of them die,
on the arrival of winter. This is plain, for at the beginning of winter
the workers become stupid, and about the solstice are seen no more;
but the rulers, which are called mother wasps, are seen during the
whole of the winter, and bury themselves in the earth; for in ploughing
and digging during the winter, the mother wasps have been frequently
observed, but no one has ever seen a worker.

3. The following is the manner of their reproduction: when the rulers
have found a place properly situated, at the beginning of summer, they
form their combs and build the wasps nests, as they are called; these
are small, with four holes, or thereabouts; in these working wasps are
produced, and not mother wasps. When these are grown, they afterwards
build larger nests, and again larger still, as the swarm increases,
so at the end of autumn the nests are very numerous and large, and in
these the mother wasps no longer produce workers but mothers. These
larger maggots are produced on the top of the upper part of the nest,
in four or rather more adjoining cells, very like those of the rulers
in their combs. When the working wasps are produced in the combs,
the rulers no longer labour, but the workers bring them food; this
is evident, from the rulers never flying away from the workers, but
remaining quietly within.

4. Whether the rulers of the previous year, when they have produced
new rulers, die at the same time as the young wasps, or whether they
survive a longer period, no one has ever observed, nor has anyone ever
observed the old age of the mother wasps, or of the wild wasps, or any
other of their affections. The mother wasp is broad and heavy, and
thicker, and larger than the working wasp, and her weight prevents her
from being very active in flight, neither can she fly far, but always
sits in the wasps' nests, and fashions and arranges the internal parts.

5. There are generally mother wasps in the nests, but there is some
doubt whether they have stings or not; they seem, however, like the
rulers among the bees, to have stings, though they never put them out
nor sting; some wasps, like the drones, are without stings, others have
a sting. Those that are without stings are smaller, and not so angry,
neither do they defend themselves; those which are furnished with a
sting are larger, and strong; some call these the males, and those
which have no sting the females. Towards winter many of those that have
stings appear to lose them, though we have never met with eye-witnesses
of this circumstance.

6. Wasps are more abundant in dry seasons and rough places; they
are produced beneath the earth, they make their combs of collected
materials and of earth, each springing from one origin, as if from
a root. They procure their food from some flowers and fruits, but
generally, they are carnivorous. Some persons have observed them in
the act of sexual intercourse, but whether one or both had stings or
not, was not seen. Some wild wasps also have been seen in the act
of intercourse, one of them had a sting, whether the other had was
not observed. Their offspring does not seem to be produced from this
intercourse, but is always larger than the offspring of the wasp should
be.

7. If a person takes hold of the legs of a wasp, and permits it to buzz
with its wings, those that have no stings will fly towards him, which
those with stings will not do, and some persons consider this to be
a sign that the one are males, the other females. Some are taken in
caverns during the winter with stings, and others without them. Some
of them make small nests and few in number; others make many large
nests. Many of those called mother wasps are taken at the turn of the
season in the neighbourhood of elms, for they collect the sticky and
glutinous matter. There are a great many mother wasps, when wasps have
been abundant during the previous year, and the weather rainy. They
are captured in the neighbourhood of precipitous places and straight
fissures in the earth, and all appear to have stings. This, then, is
the nature of wasps.


CHAPTER XXIX.

1. The wild bees do not live by gathering honey from flowers like the
bees, but are entirely carnivorous, for which reason they frequent the
neighbourhood of dung; for they pursue large flies, and when they have
taken them they tear off the head and fly away, carrying the rest of
the body with them. They will also eat sweet fruit. This, then, is the
nature of their food. They have rulers, like the bees and wasps; and
in proportion to the size of the wild bee these rulers are larger than
those of the bees and wasps. Their rulers also keep in the nest, like
those of the wasps.

2. The wild bees make their nest under the soil, which they remove like
the ants. They never swarm like bees, neither do wasps; but the young
ones always remain with them, and as the nest increases they carry out
the heap of earth. The nests become large; and from a flourishing nest
three or four baskets of comb have been taken. They do not lay up any
food like bees, but conceal themselves during the winter. The greater
number of them die, but it is not known whether all of them perish.
There is never more than one ruler in the nest as in the swarm of bees,
or they would divide the nest.

3. When some of the wild bees wander from the nest, they turn aside
to some material and form another nest, such as are often seen on the
surface of the soil, and in this they work themselves out a ruler;
and when he is grown he goes out and leads them with him to take
possession of a nest, in which they may dwell. No one has ever made any
observation on the mode of sexual intercourse in the wild bee, nor on
the origin of their offspring. Among bees the drones and kings have no
stings, and some of the wasps also are without stings, as it has been
remarked already; but all the wild bees appear to have stings, but more
accurate inquiry should be instituted as to the rulers, whether they
have stings or not.


CHAPTER XXX.

The humble bees produce their young under stones on the surface of
the ground in two or a few more cells. The commencement of a kind of
inferior honey is found in them. The tenthredo is like the wild bee,
but it is variegated, and as broad as the bee. It is a dainty creature,
and the only one which resorts to kitchens, and enjoys fish and such
like things. It deposits its young under the earth like the wasps. It
is a very productive creature, and its nest is much larger and longer
than that of the wasp. This is the nature of the work and economy of
bees, wasps, and their congeners.


CHAPTER XXXI.

1. It has been already observed that we can distinguish a difference in
the dispositions of animals, especially in the courage and cowardice,
and then in their mildness and fierceness, even in wild animals. The
lion in his manner of feeding is very cruel; but when he is not hungry,
and is full fed, his disposition is gentle. He is not either jealous
or suspicious. He is fond of playing with and affectionate towards
those animals which have been brought up with him, and to which he has
become accustomed. When hunted, he has never been seen to retreat or
be alarmed; and if compelled to yield to the numbers of his hunters,
he retreats slowly and leisurely, and turns himself round at short
intervals. If overtaken in a thicket, he flies rapidly till he reaches
the open plain, and then again he withdraws slowly. If compelled by
numbers to retreat openly on the plain ground, he runs at full stretch,
and does not leap. His manner of running is continuous, like that of a
dog at full stretch. When pursuing his prey, he throws himself upon it
when he comes within reach.

2. It is, however, true, as they say, that the lion is afraid of the
fire, as Homer also writes, "The burning faggots which he fears when
urged against him;" and that he observes the person who strikes him
and attacks him; and if a person aims a blow at him without hitting
him, the lion, if he can rush upon and seize him, does not do him any
injury, nor tear him with his claws, but shakes and frightens him,
and then leaves him. They are more disposed to enter towns and attack
mankind when they grow old; for old age renders them unable to hunt,
from the disease which attacks their teeth. They live many years; and a
lame lion has been captured which had many of its teeth broken, which
some persons considered as a sign that it had lived many years. For
this could not have happened except by the lapse of time.

3. There are two kinds of lions. One of these has a round body and
more curly hair, and is a more cowardly animal. The other is of a
longer form, has straight hair, and is more courageous. Sometimes, when
retreating, they stretch out their tails like dogs; and a lion has been
at times observed, when about to attack a hog, to retreat when that
animal erected its bristles. The lion is weak if struck in the belly,
but will bear many blows on other parts of the body, and its head is
very strong. If they bite or tear anything, a large quantity of yellow
serum flows from the wound, which can never be stopped by bandages or
sponges. The mode of healing is the same as in the bite of a dog.

4. The jackal is an animal attached to mankind. It does not injure men,
nor is it much afraid of them, but it will fight with the dog and the
lion. They are not, therefore, found in the same locality. The small
jackal is the best. Some persons say that there are two, others that
there are three sorts; but, like some fish, birds, and quadrupeds, the
jackal changes at different seasons, and has a different colour in
summer and in winter. In summer it is smooth; in winter, rough.


CHAPTER XXXII.

1. The bonassus is found in Pæonia, in Mount Messapius, which forms
the boundary between Pæonia and Mædia. The Pæonians call it monapus.
It is as large as a bull, and more heavily built; for it is not a long
animal, and its skin, when stretched out, will cover a couch for seven
persons to recline upon. In form it resembles a bull, but it has a mane
as far as the point of the shoulder like the horse, but its hair is
softer than that of the horse, and shorter. The colour of its hair is
red. The hair is deep and thick as far down as the eyes, and in colour
between ash-coloured and red, not like that of roan horses, but darker.
Its hair below is like wool. They are never either very black or very
red.

2. Their voice is like that of the ox. Their horns are crooked and
bent together, of no use for defence, a span long or a little more, so
thick that each of them would hold half a measure or a little more.
The black part of their horn is good and smooth. The fore lock is so
placed between the eyes that the creature can look sideways better than
forwards. Like the ox, it has no upper teeth in front, neither have
any horned animals. Its legs are rough and its hoofs cloven. Its tail
is small in proportion to its size, like that of the ox, and it tears
up the ground and digs with its hoof like the bull. The skin upon its
sides is strong. Its flesh is excellent food, and for this it is hunted.

3. When wounded it retreats, and stays when it can proceed no farther.
It defends itself by kicking and ejecting its dung, which it can do
to the distance of four fathoms from itself. It uses this means of
defence easily and frequently. Its dung is so caustic as to burn the
hair from dogs. The dung is only caustic when the creature is disturbed
and alarmed. It is not so when undisturbed. This is the form and nature
of this creature. At the season of parturition they collect together
in numbers in the mountains, and make a circle of their dung round
the place, as it were a fortification, for this animal ejects a large
quantity of this excrement.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Of all wild animals the elephant is the most tame and gentle; for many
of them are capable of instruction and intelligence, and they have
been taught to worship the king. It is a very sensitive creature, and
abounding in intellect. The male never again touches a female that he
has once impregnated. Some persons say that the elephant will live for
two hundred years, others an hundred and twenty, and the female lives
nearly as long as the male. They arrive at perfection when sixty years
old. They bear winter and cold weather very badly. It is an animal
that lives in the neighbourhood of rivers, though not in them. It can
also walk through rivers, and will advance as long as it can keep its
proboscis above the surface; for it blows and breathes through this
organ, but it cannot swim on account of the weight of its body.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Camels refuse to have sexual intercourse with their dams, even when
forced; for once a camel driver, who was in want of a male camel,
veiled the dam and introduced her young to her. When the covering fell
off in the act of copulation, he finished what he was about, and soon
afterwards bit the camel driver to death. It is said also that the king
of Scythia had an excellent mare, which always produced good colts. He
wished to have a colt out of the mare by the best of these horses, and
introduced him for copulation, but he would not do it. When she was
covered up, however, he performed the act unwittingly. As soon as the
form of the mare was shown after copulation, and the horse saw what was
done, he ran away and threw himself down a precipice.


CHAPTER XXXV.

1. Among marine animals there are many instances reported of the mild,
gentle disposition of the dolphin, and of its love of its children,
and its affection, in the neighbourhood of Tarentum, Caria, and other
places. It is said that when a dolphin was captured and wounded on the
coast of Caria, so great a number came up to the harbour, that the
fishermen let him go, when they all went away together. And one large
dolphin, it is said, always follows the young ones, to take care of
them; and sometimes a herd of large and small dolphins has been seen
together, and two of these having left appeared soon after, supporting
and carrying on their back a small dead dolphin, that was ready to
sink, as if in pity for it, that it might not be devoured by any other
wild creature.

2. Some incredible things are also told of their swiftness, for
it appears to be the swiftest of all animals, whether marine or
terrestrial. They will leap over the sails of large ships. This is
especially the case when they pursue a fish for the sake of food; for
their hunger will make them pursue their prey into the depths of the
sea, if it retreats to the bottom. And when they have to return from
a great depth, they hold their breath, as if they were reckoning the
distance, and then they gather themselves up, and dart forward like an
arrow, desirous of shortening their distance from a breathing-place.
And if they meet with a ship they will throw themselves over its sails.
Divers also do the same thing when they have sunk themselves into deep
water, for they also gather up their strength in order to rise to the
surface. The males and females live in pairs with each other. There is
some doubt as to the reason why they cast themselves on the land, for
they say that sometimes they appear to do this without any cause.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

1. As the actions of all animals agree with their dispositions, so also
their dispositions will change with their actions, and some of their
parts also. This takes place among birds; for hens, when they have
conquered the cock, desire to copulate with others, and their crest
and rump become elevated, so that it is difficult to say whether they
are hens or not. In some, also, small spurs are found; and some males,
after the death of the female, have been seen to take the same care
of the young as the female would have done, leading them about and
feeding them, and neither crowing, nor desiring sexual intercourse. And
some male birds have been seen to be so effeminate from their birth,
that they neither crowed, nor desired sexual intercourse, and would
submit themselves to any males that desired them.

3. Many birds at particular seasons change both their colour and their
voice, as the blackbird, which becomes russet instead of black, and
assumes another voice, for it sings in the summer time, but in winter
it chatters and screams violently. The thrush also alters its colour,
for in winter it is grey, and in summer is variegated on the neck;
but its voice does not alter. The nightingale sings unceasingly for
fifteen days and nights, when the mountains become thick with leaves.
As the summer advances it utters another voice, not quick and varied,
but simple; its colour also is altered, and in Italy it is called by
another name at this season of the year. It only shews itself for a
short time, for it lies concealed.

3. The erithacus, and the bird called phœnicurus, are changed one
into the other. The erithacus is a winter bird, the phœnicurus a
summer bird; they differ in nothing but the colour. The sycalis and
melancoryphus are the same, for these also are interchanged. The
sycalis is found in the autumn, and the melancoryphus immediately after
the end of the autumn. They also differ from each other in nothing but
their colour and voice, and to prove that it is the same bird, each
kind has been seen immediately after the change took place; and when
the change was not quite complete, there was nothing characteristic of
either form. Nor is it absurd to suppose that these birds change their
voices or their colours, for the dove utters no sound in the winter,
unless it may be on a fine day in a severe winter, when it will utter
its sound to the astonishment of those that know its habits; and as
soon as spring commences, it begins to utter its voice: and, on the
whole, birds make the greatest number and variety of voices at the
season of coition.

4. The cuckoo also changes its colour, and its voice is not distinct,
when it is about to leave us. It goes away about the time when the
dog-star rises, it having been with us from the commencement of spring
to that time. The œnanthe, as it is called, disappears when Sirius
rises, and comes again when it sets, for sometimes it retreats before
the cold, and sometimes before the heat. The hoopoe also changes its
colour and its forms, as Æschylus writes. "He had variegated this
hoopoe, the witness of its own evils, and has displayed the bold bird
that dwells in the rock in all armour. In the early spring it shakes
the feathers of the white hawk; for it has two forms, that of the
young bird and of itself, from one origin. And when the young corn of
the harvest begins to grow, it is clothed in spotted feathers; and it
always hates this place of Pallene, and inhabits deserted forests and
mountains."

5. Some birds dust themselves, and others bathe. Some neither dust nor
bathe. Those that do not fly, but live on the ground, dust themselves,
as the domestic fowl, partridge, grouse, lark, and pheasant. Those
birds which have straight claws, and live near rivers, marshes, and the
sea, bathe themselves. Some, like the pigeon and sparrow, both dust
and bathe. Most of those with crooked claws do neither the one nor the
other. This is their nature in these matters. The act of breaking wind
backwards is peculiar to some birds, as the turtle. Such birds make a
strong motion with their rumps when they utter their voice.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

1. Animals not only change their forms and dispositions at particular
ages and seasons, but also when castrated. All animals that have
testicles may be castrated. Birds and oviparous quadrupeds have
internal testicles near their loins. In viviparous animals with feet,
they are generally external, though sometimes internal; in all they are
situated at the extremity of the abdomen. Birds are castrated near the
rump, the part with which they touch the female in copulation, for if
they are burnt in that part two or three times with irons after they
are full grown, the comb turns yellow, and they cease to crow, and no
longer desire sexual intercourse. If they are not full grown, these
parts never reach perfection.

2. The same is the case with the human subject, for if a boy is
castrated, the hair that is produced after birth never appears, nor
does his voice change, but continues sharp; but if a full grown man is
castrated, all the hair produced after birth falls off except that on
the pubes, this becomes weaker, but still remains. The hair produced
at birth does not fall off, for the eunuch never becomes bald. The
voice also of castrated animals changes to that of the female. Other
animals, if not castrated when young, are destroyed by the operation;
with the boar it makes no difference. All animals, if castrated when
young, become larger and more graceful than those not castrated; but if
already grown, they never become any larger.

8. If stags are castrated before they are old enough to have horns,
these never appear; but if castrated after they have horns, their size
never varies, nor are they subject to their annual change. Calves are
castrated at a year old, if not they become bad and inferior. The steer
is castrated in this manner: they lay down the animal and cut the
scrotum, and press out the testicles; they next contract the root of
the testicle as much as possible, and fill up the wound with hair in
order that the discharge may escape, and if it inflames, they cauterize
and sprinkle the scrotum. If adult bulls are castrated, they are still
apparently capable of sexual intercourse.

4. The capria of the sow is also cut out, so that they should not
desire coition, but fatten rapidly. They are cut after fasting two
days. They hang them up by the hind legs and make an incision in the
lower part of the belly, where the testicles of the male are generally
found; the capria is there formed upon the matrix, from which they cut
off a portion, and sew up the wound again.

5. The female camels also are cut when they wish to take them to war,
that they may not become pregnant. Some of those in the upper parts of
Asia possess as many as three thousand. Such camels, when they run,
are far more swift than the Nisæan horses, from the length of their
stretch. And on the whole, castrated animals are longer-bodied than
those not castrated.

6. All animals that ruminate, derive as much use and pleasure from
rumination as from eating. Animals that have not cutting-teeth in both
jaws ruminate, as the ox, sheep, and goat. No observations have been
made on wild animals except those which occasionally associate with
men, as the stag, though this animal ruminates. They all lie down to
ruminate, and do so most in the winter; those which are brought up in
shelter ruminate for nearly seven months. Those that live in herds,
ruminate for a shorter period, for they live out of doors. Some animals
with cutting teeth in both jaws, ruminate, as the Pontic mice and the
fish, which, from this process, is called meryx. Animals with long legs
have loose bellies, and those with broad chests vomit more easily than
others, in quadrupeds, birds, and the generality of mankind.




BOOK THE TENTH.

(ERRONEOUSLY ASCRIBED TO ARISTOTLE.)


CHAPTER I.

If men and women, after they have reached a certain age, do not have
children after cohabitation, the fault sometimes rests with both, and
sometimes in only one of them. And first, it is requisite to examine
the uterus of the female, that if the fault lies there it may be
relieved by proper treatment. If the fault is not there, attention must
be paid to some other cause of sterility. We may conclude that this
organ is in a healthy state, when, like the other parts of the body,
it performs its functions without pain, and is free from fatigue after
the function is performed. Just as the eye is in a healthy state if it
suffers no pain in seeing, and is not disordered with the exercise of
its function, or unable to perform it again, so the uterus is healthy
which suffers no pain, and is well able to perform its functions,
whatever they may be, and after they are performed is not impotent, but
is free from fatigue.

2. The uterus is said to be disordered, when, even if it performs its
functions properly and without pain, it does not hinder its function
by any part of itself.[229] As there is nothing to prevent an eye
from seeing accurately, although all its parts are not perfect, or if
there happens to be a tumour in it; so the uterus may have received no
injury in this respect, if it is properly situated in the right place.
In the first place, then, the healthy uterus will not be situated in
this place or in that, but will always be in a similar position; but
it is not difficult to decide whether it is not placed at too great
a distance without suffering and pain, or whether it is devoid of
sensation when touched. That these parts ought to be properly placed
is evident from the following considerations, for if the uterus is
not near, it will not be able to imbibe the semen, for the place from
which it ought to receive it will be at too great a distance. If the
uterus is near, and not able to retire further, it will be useless, for
it will be always touched so as to refuse to open; but it ought to do
this, and to be obedient to its function. These things ought to be thus
ordered, and if they are not, the case requires attention.

[229] A corrupt passage.

3. The catamenia also should proceed correctly, that is, if the general
health is good, they should last for their proper time, and not
come irregularly, for when the catamenia are right, the uterus will
open properly, and receive the fluids of the body whenever they are
secreted; but when they make their appearance too often, or not often
enough, or irregularly, while the rest of the body does not sympathise
with them, and the general health is good, we must look to the uterus
for the cause of their irregularity. The dullness of the uterus
prevents its being opened at the proper time, so that it receives but
a small portion, or rather the uterus imbibes the fluid from some
inflammation of the parts. So that it shows that it requires attention,
like the eyes, the bladder, the stomach, and other parts. For all the
parts, when inflamed, imbibe the fluid which is secreted into each
place, but not such a fluid, or in so great quantities.

4. In like manner, if the uterus secretes more than it ought to do,
it exhibits an inflammatory tendency, if the secretion is regular
but too abundant; but if the secretion is irregular, or more putrid
than it should be in healthy subjects, the disease is then quite
manifest, for it is necessary that some pain should show that all is
not well. In a healthy subject, at the commencement, and the cessation
of menstruation, the secretion appears white and putrid. All those
subjects in whom the secretion is more putrid than in healthy persons,
or is irregular, or too abundant, or deficient, should receive
attention, for this it is that prevents child-bearing. But in those
subjects who are only irregular, and unequal in the periods of the
secretion, the disease is not the preventive of child-bearing, though
it shows that the habit of the uterus is changeable, and does not
always remain the same. And this affection is sufficient to prevent
those persons from conception who are otherwise well disposed towards
it. It is, however, hardly a disease, but an affection which may be
restored without medical treatment, unless it is affected by some
previous fault.

5. If the regularity and quantity of the discharge is subject to
alteration, without any corresponding change in the rest of the body,
which is sometimes in a more fluid, at other times in a more dry state,
the uterus is not in fault, though it ought to follow the habit of the
rest of the body, and receive and secrete in proportion. If the body
is in a good state of health, but undergoing a change, when this takes
place, and there is no need of medical treatment; but if the secretion
is too small from disease, and the secretion is taken through some
other source, the body suffers: and if the discharge is too great, from
all the secretions of the body being turned in one direction, this does
not point to disease of the uterus, but of the whole body. Whenever the
catamenia coincide with the general habit of the body, it is evident
that the fault does not lie with the uterus, which would perform its
functions properly if the general health were correct.

6. Sometimes the uterus is weak, and sometimes strong; sometimes too
fluid, and sometimes too dry; and the discharge coincides with the
state of the body, it is abundant when that is full, deficient when it
is less full. If the body is full of fluid, the discharge is watery; if
the body is dry, it is more sanguineous; it begins with being white,
like milk, and is without smell. Some are dark-coloured, and when about
to cease they become white, at the last secretion. The white discharge
has not the smell of putrid matter, but is more harsh and disagreeable,
nor has it the smell of pus; and when this is the condition of the
symptoms, there is no wearing away, but the body becomes heated. In
all that are in this state, the uterus is in a healthy condition for
child-bearing.


CHAPTER II.

We must, then, first of all inquire whether all these particulars are
well ordered; and, next, we must learn the position of the body of the
uterus; for it ought to be straight; and if it is not so, the seminal
fluid can never reach it. And it is evident that women project their
semen forwards, from what happens when they have lascivious dreams; for
this part of them then requires attention, being moistened as though
they had sexual intercourse, for they also project into the place
where the semen of the male is emitted, and not into the uterus; and
when projected to this place, the semen is drawn into the uterus by
inhalation, as the mucus is drawn into the nose. For this reason they
become pregnant in every position; for the seminal fluid both in men
and women is always projected forwards; but if it were projected into
the female she would not always conceive after copulation.

2. But if the uterus is not straight, but inclined to the hips, the
loins, or the hypogastric region, it is impossible to conceive, for the
before-mentioned reason, that the uterus cannot take up the seminal
fluid. If this deformity is great, either naturally or from disease,
the disorder is incurable. If there is a rupture, either by nature or
arising from the disease, which contracts the parts with inflammation,
the disorder will take a different turn from this. But in order that
women may become pregnant, it is necessary, as it was said, that the
mouth of the uterus should be straight and, moreover, should be well
opened. By this I mean that when the menstrual discharge commences,
the os uteri should, on contact, appear softer than before, though not
distinctly expanded. But if this is the case, let the first appearance
be white.

3. But when the appearances are more the colour of flesh, the uterus
will be evidently relaxed without pain when it is touched, and the os
uteri is neither dull nor different from itself; and when the discharge
ceases, let the aperture be very open and dry, but not hard, for a
day and a half or two days; for this shows that the uterus is in a
healthy state, and fit to perform its functions. If the os uteri is not
immediately relaxed, but appears soft, it shows that both the uterus
and the rest of the body are relaxed, and the uterus does not prevent,
but first discharges the secretion from the os uteri. And when the
rest of the body has discharged a great deal, and the os uteri becomes
relaxed, it is a sign of a healthy condition.

4. And when the appearances cease to take place directly, the uterus
shows that, if there is any difficulty, it will become empty and dry,
and wanting in moisture, and there will be no remains in the passage.
When the uterus, therefore, is capable of contraction, it shows that it
is in a proper state for receiving whatever is brought to it, when it
is in this state without pain, and indeed is insensate; and it is good
that the os uteri should not be in any other condition. This shows that
there is no reason why it should not close at the proper time. This
is the manner of considering the os uteri, whether it is in a healthy
condition or not.


CHAPTER III.

These ought to be the symptoms of the uterus itself after purification.
First of all, that the woman should dream of sexual intercourse, and
project her seminal fluid readily, as if a man were lying with her;
and if this symptom occur frequently, it is better. And when she has
arisen, sometimes she should require the same treatment as if she had
been with a man, sometimes she should be dry; but this dryness should
not be immediate; but after awaking she should be fluid, sooner or
later, about as much as half a short day. The humidity should be of
the same kind as if she had been with a man. For all this shows that
the uterus is in a fit state to receive what is given it, and that the
cotyledons are drawn up and will retain what they have received, and be
unwilling to part with it.

2. A flatulent state of the uterus is also a good sign, when it
enlarges and discharges the wind as the bowels do without pain, and
when it becomes larger and smaller without any symptom of disease; for
these symptoms show that the uterus is not in want of what is necessary
nor sluggish, either naturally or from disease, but that it will be
able to find room by growth for anything that it may receive, for it
has the power of dilation. When this is not the case, the uterus is too
thick, or some natural defect or disease has rendered it insensible.
For this cause it cannot nourish, but it will destroy the embryo,
if the symptoms are violent, while the embryo is small; if they are
less so, when it is larger; if the uterus is slightly affected, the
offspring will be inferior, as if it had been fed in an inferior vessel.

3. Upon contact, the right and left side will be found to be alike,
and all the other parts in the same way; and in the act of copulation
moisture will be produced, not frequently nor in great abundance. This
affection is, as it were, a perspiration of the place, like the saliva,
which is frequently produced both in the use of food and in speaking.
Tears also are shed from the eyes, when we look upon brilliant objects,
and under cold or greater heat, of which these parts also partake,
when they happen to be moist. So the uterus becomes moist when
employed, when it is of a more moist disposition. Those that are in the
best health suffer from this affection, for which reason women always
require more or less attention, as also the mouth requires saliva. In
some this moisture is so abundant that they cannot imbibe the seminal
fluid of the man in a state of purity, on account of its admixture with
this uterine moisture.

4. Besides these affections, the following also is to be considered,
whether, when they dream of sexual intercourse, their general health is
good or not, as whether they are weak, and whether they are so always,
or only sometimes, and whether they are not sometimes strong, and
whether they are dry at first and moist afterwards; for this ought to
be the condition of a woman capable of child-bearing; for relaxation
shows that the body has been profuse of the seminal fluid, and that it
can perform its functions; but when the uterus is hard, it is a sign of
debility. If a woman has this affection without any disease, it shows
that the emission takes place naturally and as it ought to do. For if
it were not so, there would be disease and prostration of strength.
Sometimes, when the uterus is dry and afterwards becomes moist, it is
a sign that the whole body receives and makes away with the seminal
fluid, and that both the uterus and the body are strong; for it has
been already observed that the uterus absorbs the semen which is placed
upon it by the process of inhalation, for it is not emitted into it but
upon the same place as that of the man. All that takes by inhalation
is accompanied with force, so that it is plain that the body of such a
person must have the power of retraction.

5. It sometimes happens that women who have lascivious dreams, or men
of strong passions, are robust not from strength but from health. This
takes place when a large quantity of seminal fluid has been collected
near the place from whence they emit it. If this makes its escape, they
are in no ways debilitated; for they are not relaxed by the loss of a
portion, if sufficient remains behind, or if that which was emitted
was useless, nor if it was emitted easily, as if they parted with
superfluous matter. For which reason such persons are not robust from
strength but from dullness. But when any part is emitted which is
necessary for the body, they become debilitated.

6. If a person is in good health, and of a proper age, the seminal
fluid is rapidly formed. This takes place in those that have not done
growing and in those that are grown. Women rarely know when they are
first pregnant; for they do not think that they have conceived unless
they perceive that the semen has been emitted, suspecting that it ought
to be emitted at the same time both by the female and the male; and it
escapes their notice, more especially when they think that they are
unable to conceive, unless they have become dry, and that which they
have received has disappeared entirely; but it sometimes happens that
both the male and the female emit more than could possibly disappear,
and more than enough for conception. When sufficient has been drawn in
and much left out, they become pregnant without knowing it.

7. That it is possible that this should take place, and that the
affection does not arise from the whole of the seminal fluid, we may
learn from those animals which produce many young ones from a single
act of intercourse, or from the case of twins produced by a single
act. It is evident that they are not produced from the whole semen,
but each place receives some portion of it, but the larger portion
is left behind; and if many young are produced from a single act of
intercourse, which appears to be the case with swine and with twins,
it is evident that the semen cannot come from every part of the body,
but it is divided out to each form. It is possible, therefore, that it
may be separated from every part of the body, and that the whole may
be divided among many, so that it is not possible that all should have
every part. The female also projects her semen into the os uteri, where
the man also emits his, when he approaches her. From thence she imbibes
with inhalation as if it were with the mouth or nostrils; for whatever
is not joined to the members is either hollow above and united by a
symphysis, or is sucked in from this place by the act of inhalation.
For which reason they take care that it should be dry, as if this had
happened before.

8. The path along which it passes is thus formed in women. There is a
tube enclosed in the body like the penis of the male. The inhalation
takes place through this by a small passage above the passage for the
urine. When, therefore, they desire sexual intercourse, this part is
not in the same condition as it was before. A falling down takes place
from this passage, and the fore part of the uterus becomes much larger
than the part where it falls into this passage. This resembles the
nostrils; for, as the nostrils have a passage into the pharynx and into
the external air, so this tube has a very small and narrow passage,
like a passage out for the wind. That to the fore part of the uterus
is wide and broad, as the nostrils are to the external air between the
mouth and the pharynx. So women have a larger passage to the fore part
of the uterus, and wider than the external passage.

9. Whatever conjecture is formed concerning these affections, it makes
to the same conclusion, that the woman also emits a seminal fluid.
The same things arise from the same cause, for to some it seems to be
the cause of disease or of death; and these consider the end at the
beginning as it ought to be considered; for to some women these are
important causes, to some of no importance; and of these causes some
are and some are not of consequence. They divide also in proportion the
consequences which may result from them. To some it happens to pass
through all these affections; to those who have many, through many of
them: others through few; and others, again, who have none, through
none of them.

10. There are some persons who suffer from the affection called
inflation. This ought not to be. The affection is of this kind. In
copulation they neither evidently emit semen, nor do they become
pregnant. Wherefore they are said to be inflated. The excessive dryness
of the uterus is the cause of this complaint; and when it has drawn
the fluid into itself, it ejects it again. This becomes dried up, and
having become small falls out, without any notice being taken of the
circumstance on account of its size. When the uterus is violently
affected in this way, and becomes very dry, and ejects it very soon,
it is plain that pregnancy cannot take place. If this does not take
place very soon, impregnation appears for a time to have taken place
until it is ejected. The same thing also takes place at times in those
who have conceived properly; if a long time has elapsed, the uterus
becomes elevated, so that it plainly appears as if impregnation had
taken place until it falls out. Then all becomes as it was at first.
They refer this affliction to a divine origin. It is curable, unless
it is natural, or the disease has gone a great way. It is a sign that
this disease is not present, when women appear neither to have emitted
semen, nor to have conceived after sexual intercourse.


CHAPTER IV.

1. Pregnancy is prevented also by spasm in the uterus. This complaint
attacks the uterus when it is either distended with inflammation,
or in the act of parturition. When any large quantity of matter
suddenly enters it, and the os uteri is not open, spasm then arises
from distension. It is a sign of the absence of spasm, if the uterus
does not appear to reach inflammation in its functions: whereas, if
spasm were present, there would be some signs of inflammation. Again,
a swelling at the mouth of the uterus, if it is much drawn out, will
prevent conception. It is a sign that this is not the case, when the
uterus appears to open and close properly after the discharge of the
catamenia, or the use of the male.

2. In some, also, the os uteri is closed, either from the period
of birth, or in consequence of disease. Sometimes this is curable,
and sometimes not so. It is not, however, difficult to ascertain
the state of the case, for it is not possible either to receive or
to emit anything in a proper manner. If it appears to have received
and rejected the seminal fluid of the male, it is an evidence of the
presence of the disease. But those who have no impediment in the way of
conception, but are, as it has been said, as they ought to be, unless
the man is impotent, or they are not able to have children together,
being unable to emit their semen at the same time, and differ very
much, such persons will have no children.


CHAPTER V.

In order to understand of sterility in the male, we must take other
symptoms. These will appear very easy, if he copulates with other
women, and impregnates them. When the sexes do not appear to concur
with each other, although all the before-mentioned circumstances are
present, they do not have children together. For it is evident that
this is the only reason of sterility: for if the woman contributes
to the semen and generation, it is evident that both the sexes should
be concurrent: for if the man is quick, and the woman slow, in the
emission of the semen (and many women are comparatively slow), this
will prevent conception; for which cause they do not produce children
by sexual union with each other. They do so, however, when they happen
to be concurrent with each other; for if the woman is desirous, and
prepared for the intercourse, and is inclined for it, but the man is
suffering previous pain, and of a cold disposition, it is then also
necessary that they should be concurrent.


CHAPTER VI.

It is quite plain when animals desire sexual intercourse; for the
female pursues the male, as hens pursue the cock and place themselves
beneath him, if the male is not desirous. Other animals also do the
same. But if all animals appear to have these affections with respect
to sexual intercourse, it is plain that the causes must be the same
throughout. This bird, however, has not only the desire of receiving,
but also of emitting semen. This is a proof of it. If the male is not
present, she will emit the semen into herself, and become pregnant, and
produce barren eggs, as if she desired both to emit semen, and when she
had done so, soon ceased, just as when the male was present. Others
also do the same, for a person has attempted to rear some singing
locusts, which he had taken in a young state. When grown, they became
pregnant spontaneously.

2. From these considerations it is plain that every female contributes
to the semen, if this appears to take place in any one class of
animals, for the barren animal differs in no respect from the other,
except that it does not produce an animal, and this because it was
formed by the union of both sexes. For this reason all the seminal
fluid of the male does not appear to be productive, but some parts are
barren, when not properly compounded from both sexes. And when women
have lascivious dreams, the same affections of weakness and debility
often occur, as if they had been lying with a male. It is plain,
therefore, that if they appear to have emitted a seminal fluid in
their dream, they will then conjecture that after their dream the same
place will become moist, and they will be obliged to bestow the same
attention upon themselves as if they had had sexual intercourse. So
that it is evident that there must be an emission of semen from both if
it is to be productive.

3. But the uterus does not emit its semen into itself, but on the
outside, into the place where that of the male also is received, and
then draws it into itself. For some females produce spontaneously, as
the bird produces barren eggs, and other females do not so, as the
horses and sheep; either because the bird projects her semen into the
uterus, and the place upon which that of the male is emitted is not
external; for which reason, if he does not copulate properly with the
female, it is poured out upon the ground. But in quadrupeds there is
another place for the reception of the semen, both of the male and
female, which in other animals it is combined with other fluids of the
body, and is not collected in the uterus, because it does not enter it.
But in birds, the uterus receives and matures the seminal fluid, and
forms a body similar in other respects though not a living creature.
It is necessary, therefore, the living creature should be derived from
both sexes.


CHAPTER VII.

We must enquire whether women speak the truth, when they say that
after a lascivious dream they find themselves dry; for it is plain
that the uterus draws upwards. And if so, why do not females become
pregnant spontaneously, since the male seminal fluid is drawn in, mixed
with their own? And why do not she goats draw that part of it which
extends outwards? for this affection takes place in some that have
been pregnant many years; for they produce what is called myle (an
amorphous mass of flesh), a circumstance which has also happened to a
certain woman; for having had sexual intercourse, and to all appearance
conceived, the size of the uterus increased, and everything at first
went on regularly: but when the time of parturition arrived, she
produced nothing, nor did the enlargement become any smaller: but after
three or four years, a dysentery occurred, which placed her life in
danger, when she produced a large mass of flesh, which they call myle.
The affection continues in some to old age, even to the day of their
death.

2. Does this affection arise from a warm habit of body, when the uterus
is warm and dry, and for this reason capable of drawing into itself in
such a manner that it is taken up and kept in it? For, in persons so
affected, if the seminal fluid of both sexes is not united, but, like
the barren egg, is taken up by one sex, then the myle is produced,
which is not living creature, for it does not originate in both sexes,
nor is it lifeless, for it is taken to have life like the barren egg.
It remains, however, a long while, on account of the disposition of the
uterus, and because the bird, which has produced many eggs in herself,
when the uterus is stimulated by these, goes and lays them: and when
the first is produced, the last will also come forth in proper time:
for there is nothing to prevent it, but the body being productive as
soon as it is full, causes the uterus to be no longer retentive. But
in viviparous animals, on account of the change of force, as the fœtus
increases, and the diversity of food is required, the uterus causes
parturition from a kind of inflammation.

3. But the flesh, because it is not alive, always requires the same
kind of food, for it does not cause any weight in the uterus, nor any
inflammation. So that the affection would continue, in some cases,
throughout life, unless some fortunate debility should take place, as
in the woman who was attacked with dysentery. But does this affection
arise from warmth, as it was said, or rather from a fluid state,
because there is a fulness as it closes, either because the uterus
is neither cold enough to reject it, nor warm enough to bring it to
maturity? Wherefore, the disease lasts a long while, like those things
which remain a long while before they are matured; but those that are
about to come to maturity have an end, and that quickly. Such uteri,
being very high up, cause a long delay. And, again, not being alive,
it does not cause any pain by its movements, for the movement of the
ligament which the living fœtus produces, causes pain. And the hardness
of the substance is the effect of imperfect production, for it is so
hard that it cannot be cut by the stroke of an axe. All ripe and mature
things become soft, but imperfectly digested things are immature and
hard.

4. Wherefore, many physicians, deceived by the resemblance, say that
women are suffering from myle, if they only see the abdomen elevated
without dropsy, and a cessation of the catamenia, when the disease has
lasted for a long while. But this is not the case, for the myle is a
rare disease. Sometimes there will be collections of cold and moist
excrements and fluids, and sometimes of thick ones in this part of the
abdomen, if either the nature or the habit is of this kind. For these
things afford neither pain nor heat, on account of their cold nature;
but if they increase, more or less, they bring no other disease after
them, but remain quiet, like some maimed thing.

5. The cessation of the catamenia takes place on account of the
excrementitious matter of the body being directed to this point, as
when women are nursing; for they occur either not at all, or only in
small quantities. A collection of matter from the flesh sometimes takes
place between the uterus and the stomach, which has the character
of the myle, but is not it. But it is not difficult to know the
difference, by touching the uterus; for if it is correctly placed, and
not enlarged, it is evident that the disease is not there; but if it
is the same as when with child, it will be warm, and cold, and dry,
because all the fluids are turned inwards; and the os uteri will be in
the same condition as when they are pregnant; but if the enlargement is
of any other kind, it will be cold, and not dry when touched, and the
os uteri will always be the same.




APPENDIX.

     ESSAY ON THE LITERARY AND PECUNIARY RESOURCES WHICH ARISTOTLE
     EITHER USED, OR IS SAID TO HAVE USED IN THE EXAMINATION AND
     COMPOSITION OF HIS HISTORY OF ANIMALS.

              _Translated from the Latin of Schneider._


Aristotle had very likely more authorities, whom he has followed, or
converted to his own purposes, than those whose names he has given.
These are, however, a few, whom he has named, as Alcmæon of Crotona;
Dionysius of Apollonia; Herodorus of Heracleum in Pontus, the father
of Bryson the sophist; Ctesias of Cnidos; Herodotus of Halicarnassus;
Syennesis of Cyprus; Polybus; Democritus of Abdera; Anaxagoras of
Clazomene; Empedocles of Sicily; and if there are any more which do
not just now occur to my memory, they are accurately enumerated in the
index, with the names of the places to which they belonged. I have said
that it is probable, that Aristotle has derived information from more
authorities than he has named; and a reason for this conjecture is
found in a passage which he extracts, almost verbatim, from Herodotus,
on the Nilotic crocodile (Euterpe, 68). This I have shewn in a note on
the passage, book v. ch. 27, 2. And there are many places, both in his
natural history and his other works on animals, where our philosopher
refers to the ancient fables of men who were transformed into the
nature and forms of various animals. The oldest author of such fables
is Boeus (or Boeo, in the feminine gender, as some have conjectured).
From this book Antoninus Literalis has extracted many chapters in
Greek. Nicander of Colophon, and others, followed the example of
Boeus. Among Latin writers, the Metamorphoses of Ovid have always
commanded attention. All who have read the work of Antoninus, and the
Metamorphoses of Ovid, will easily perceive how much information on the
nature and habits of animals our philosopher could have derived from
the very character of the books which had come down from the remotest
antiquity to the time of Aristotle (compare note 9, 17, 1), especially
if they bear in mind that the ancient teachers of physics always
compared the habits of animals with those of man, and conjectured the
causes and reasons of their actions, from similar impulses in man.
This may be seen in the fables of Æsop, for they contain the first
elements of the doctrines of the ancients on physics and morals. We
might also offer a surmise on Eudoxus, and Scylax, and others, who
wrote "Travels Round the Earth," in which they described the animals
of different countries; for our philosopher appeals to the testimony
of both these authors, in his work on Meteorics, and elsewhere. There
is more doubt whether Aristotle used, or could have used, the numerous
notices of animals, of the interior of Asia and India, which the
companions of Alexander, in his Asiatic and Indian expeditions, brought
back to Greece; which Theophrastus, the pupil of Aristotle, and his
successor in the schools, is found to have used so well in his History
of Plants. For this I consider to be proved, that the written notices
of the companions of Alexander were published after the death of the
king, though we have no proof of the exact year in which they were
made public. Indeed I have never found any evidence in the History of
Animals which could lead us to suppose that Aristotle was acquainted
with the animals of the interior of Asia and India, by information
derived from the companions of Alexander; nor have I been able to find
the slightest information from which I can form a conjecture as to
either the place or time when this history was written: but, in order
that others may institute a more rigorous inquiry into the date and
place of its authorship, if any such have escaped my notice, I will
place before my readers that portion of the Aristotelian chronology
which relates to this work, from the disputation of St. Croix, a
learned French author (Examen Critique des Historiens d'Alexander le
Grand, p. 603, second edition). Aristotle, therefore, at the invitation
of Philip, King of Macedon, undertook the education of his son,
Alexander, when he was thirteen years of age, in the second year of
the 109th Olympiad, when Phythodotus was Archon of Athens. Aristotle
returned to Athens in the second year of the 111th Olympiad, in the
Archonship of Evænetus. He taught at Athens for thirteen years, from
whence he fled to Chalcis, and there he died, in the third year of the
114th Olympiad, during the Archonship of Philocles.

There is, indeed, a passage in Pliny, (book x. ch. 64, sect. 84, on the
fecundity of mice,) where he says, that among other things Aristotle
has spoken in his History of Animals (vi. 29) of the gravid fœtus
of the Persian mice; but the Greek exemplar contains no authority
from which Pliny could have derived the words which he has added:
"More wonderful than all is the fœtus of the mice, which we cannot
unhesitatingly receive, though derived from the authority of Aristotle,
and the soldiers of Alexander the Great." In this and in two other
places he calls those _soldiers_ whom others are in the habit of
calling the _companions_ of Alexander the Great. But there is also
a passage in the Meteorics of Aristotle (iii. 1), where he mentions
as a recent event the destruction of the temple of Ephesus, by the
incendiary Herostratus, on the day of Alexander's birth, in these
words: "As it has just now happened in the burning of the temple of
Ephesus." This book, therefore, appears to have been written at the
commencement of the 106th Olympiad, and with it the History of Animals
is very closely connected, as I have shown in my treatise on the order
of the books of Physics; so that we may suppose that they were written
in nearly the same Olympiad, if we regard only the series of the works;
and no interruption occurred with which we are unacquainted. On the
other hand, in the Meteorics (iii. 5), he speaks of a lunar rainbow,
and says that it is rarely seen, and then adds, "that it has occurred
but twice in more than fifty years." If we reckon these fifty years
from the birth of Aristotle, in the first year of the 99th Olympiad,
that book will fall in the third or fourth year of the 111th Olympiad;
and from this calculation it would follow that this book was also
written in Athens, but that the first date is to be taken in a wider
sense.

From all this, we may easily perceive that at this day we are entirely
ignorant of the sources of information collected either from
ancient or contemporary writers, to which our philosopher had access
in composing and completing a work of such multiplied and varied
information. Even if we assume that they were as large as the mind
of Aristotle was great, acute, and transparent, still, for a work so
various and extensive, spread over seas, rivers, earth, and heaven,
even that mind would require some assistance from other sources to
which it might apply in constructing and building up a system of
general instruction from the materials collected in different places
about various animals, and from the observations used in describing and
arranging them together in orders, classes, genera, and species. The
following were the sources Aristotle used, according to the narrative
of an uncertain author quoted by Pliny (viii. 16, 17)--"King Alexander
the Great," he says, "was possessed with the desire of knowing the
natures of animals, and therefore delegated the work to Aristotle, a
man of very great learning. Some thousands of men in the whole region
of Asia and Greece obeyed his commands, all, namely, who obtained their
livelihood by hunting, hawking, or fishing, or who had in their care
menageries, herds, beehives, fishponds, or aviaries; so that nothing in
nature might be unknown to him; and from his examination of these, he
compiled those fifty celebrated volumes, which I have collected into
one, together with those animals with which he was unacquainted, and I
hope that they will be consulted by good scholars." In all this there
is nothing contradictory to the mind and liberality of Alexander, or
the confidence or strength of his empire. But some may prefer the story
published by Ælian, in his various history (iv. 19), who, I know not
on what authority, transfers the narrative to Philip, the father of
Alexander--"Having supplied abundance of riches to Aristotle, he was
the means of many other undertakings, and especially of his knowledge
of living creatures; and the son of Nichomachus completed his history
by the liberal assistance of Philip; who also honoured Plato and
Theophrastus." If this be true, it evidently refers to those seven or
eight years in which Aristotle was in Macedonia presiding over the
education of Alexander, the son of Philip.

These abundant supplies for the studies of Aristotle are not at all
inconsistent, either with the liberality of Philip, or his love for
his son and his son's tutor, nor do they surpass credibility. The gold
mines of Philippi supplied the munificence and liberality of Philip.
But there are difficulties in the narrative which make us question the
credibility of the author of this munificence. For instance, the names
of Plato and Theophrastus are mentioned; but the name of Theophrastus
could not be so great and illustrious, even if it were known to the
Greeks at all, as to have attracted the liberality of Philip, before
the death of his master Aristotle, whom also he succeeded in the School
at Athens. I should, therefore, rather imagine that Ælian, who was
more diligent in the accuracy of his Attic diction than his historical
fidelity, has committed some error in the name of Philip, or in those
of Plato and Theophrastus, whom he has appended to his narrative.

The narrative of Athenæus, (ix. 398,) derived from the report of an
unknown author, is very different; he calls the History of Animals a
very expensive work, and then adds--"There is a report that Aristotle
received 800 talents from Alexander, for writing the History of
Animals"--a sum of money which Perigonius, in his Notes on Ælian,
estimates at 1,440,000 caroli. To this narrative, or, as it may be
more justly termed, rumour, is opposed the opinion of Io. Henr.
Schulzius, in his History of Medicine (Leipsic, 1738, p. 358). "When
I consider this matter aright, it appears to me that the whole story
is very doubtful, and, for the most part, fabulous. And it can easily
be proved, that the whole revenue of Macedon, if Alexander had paid it
all to Aristotle for several years, would not have amounted to this
sum. It is impossible, therefore, that he could have paid so much
to Aristotle before the conquest of Asia; and after his expedition
had been successfully accomplished, his affection was alienated from
Aristotle, and, in order to annoy him, he liberally enriched other
philosophers, who had done nothing to deserve his patronage. Their
labours, therefore, are in vain, who demand justice of our excellent
Aristotle, even in his grave, because he did not use such an immense
sum of money in the composition of a more veracious history.

"I am certainly of opinion that a great deal has been made, as
usual, of a very little matter, namely, that if Aristotle derived
any assistance in that kingdom, all the materials were provided for
him while Philip was alive, and before Alexander's expedition was
undertaken, or in the first years of the expedition. But afterwards,
when Alexander had set out, Aristotle returned to Athens, and was
engaged in teaching: nor could he have derived any advantage from
the resources which Pliny mentions, and the multitude of persons who
were instructed to place themselves under his command, for he was not
only occupied with other pursuits, but would have been in danger of
being destroyed by the fury of the Athenians, on the plea that he was
attempting innovations, if he had even ventured to dissect animals, not
to say men."

In a note he adds these observations:--"Aristobulus, no unworthy
companion of Alexander in his expedition, bears testimony, according to
Plutarch, that the whole military chest did not contain seventy talents
of coin. For the preparation of so arduous an undertaking, however, the
same person says, that two hundred talents ought to have been taken
for mutual exchange. I remember also to have read in Eustathius's
commentary on Homer, a very learned disquisition on the scarcity of
money amongst the Macedonians, at the time of Alexander's expedition;
but I cannot lay my hands upon the passage."

I must confess that I am not influenced by this annotation, nor does
the whole of this controversy appear to me to have been properly
conducted. For the greatest doubt prevails as to the number of talents
which Alexander is said to have paid to Aristotle, to help him in his
task; and the report only rests on the authority of a writer who lived
centuries after the death of Alexander. To refute this is useless
labour, both because its origin is obscure, and also because a sum of
money set down in figures might be easily corrupted by transcribers.
But the testimony of Aristobulus will give little or no assistance to
the opinion of the learned, if we adopt that which is most probable,
namely, that Philip, or his son Alexander, gave large sums of money
to Aristotle, to enable him to pursue his studies in Natural History,
while he lived in Macedon, and was employed in the education of
Alexander. The question about the date when Aristotle arranged and
published the materials and notes he had collected is quite distinct,
and I do not think that it can be precisely ascertained at the present
time. The conjecture I have hazarded (light enough, I must confess)
does not say much in favour of the story of abundant treasures supplied
by Philip, or Alexander, to our philosopher, for the composition of his
Natural History. But these persons form a very poor estimate of the
study and labour bestowed by Aristotle upon the History of Animals,
who imagine that our philosopher had only access to such books as now
remain, forgetting those of which time has robbed us.

Most of all we must regret his Ζωϊκὰ, which appears to have given a
more accurate description of animals, and his ἀνατομικὰ, which further
contained notices of their internal structure, and was illustrated
by drawings to which he often refers in his Natural History, as well
as in his works on the parts and the generation of animals. It will
scarcely be possible to fix with any accuracy on the number of books
he employed, after the great carelessness of librarians, and the many
facilities for error in copyists, arising from the method of notation
by letters. Antigonus Carystius, in his sixty-sixth chapter, increases
the number of volumes given by Pliny, for he writes seventy; and if
the titles of the books, as they are given by Diogenes Laertius and
Athenæus, are compared with those published, the number of books
relating to Animal History to which he may have had access are readily
estimated, even should every book of every work be reckoned as a
separate book, and the list compared with the number given by Pliny.

In the memory of our fathers and grandfathers (for, alas! at the
present time few trouble themselves with the works of the ancients)
there were many who blamed Aristotle for these works, both for his
manner of treating the subjects and his narratives of the lives and
habits of animals, and vexed them with questions and disputations.

These objections will be better answered, when we come to those
passages of the History. It may, however, be of some general avail to
put a stop to these objections, which were urged against his manner of
teaching; and I hope to be able to point out some peculiar sources from
which Aristotle appears to have derived the more difficult parts of
his History, and those which were obnoxious to dispute.

Amongst other foolish and trifling questions with which some
Grammarian, in the Deipnosophistæ of Athenæus, (viii. p. 352,) has
endeavoured not only to impugn, but even destroy our philosopher's
credibility, is the following:--"I do not much admire the diligence of
Aristotle, though others praise him so highly. At what time, I should
like to know, or from what Proteus or Nereus ascending from the deep,
to give him information, did he learn what the fishes were doing there,
and in what manner they slept and took their food; for he writes things
of this kind, which are only 'the miracles of fools,' as the comic poet
says."

I will not follow the rest of his argument, which relates to
terrestrial and winged animals; for the aquatic, and especially
the marine creatures, seem to offer the greatest opportunity for
questioning the fidelity of his narrative. In the first place, then, we
may observe, that of all mankind the Greeks were amongst the greatest
eaters of fish, at least after the heroic and Homeric ages; for Homer
is never found to mention fish at the suppers and festivals of his
heroes. So that I should not wonder if the frequent and repeated
industry and observation of fishermen, following their labours both in
rivers and seas, to adorn the tables of their fellow citizens, supplied
ample and varied information to learned men who were engaged in the
investigation of natural objects. By the same means they might learn
from hunters the haunts and dispositions of wild beasts, and those of
domesticated animals from husbandmen. The whole life and labour of such
men was devoted to the uses, advantages, and food of man; and their
observations would be particularly directed to those animals which
could assist in sharing the labours of mankind, or whose flesh or other
parts were required for food or medicine. Their parturition and its
proper time, the number of their young, the manner of bringing them up,
their nutriment, the pastures and food of the parents, and the proper
time for hunting them, were observed with the greatest accuracy. And
if any diseases arising from the weather, their food, or their drink
impended over them, and threatened their production or the life of the
wild cattle, or if a peculiar or common enemy laid in wait for the
life of one or all, it could not easily escape their observation; and
from these circumstances we may manifestly derive the origin of those
fables and narratives in which the opinions of animals are compared
with the life and manner of human beings, such as the simple minds
of hunters, fishers, and rustics could comprehend. In these books of
natural history we find traces of many stories of this kind which it is
unnecessary here to point out.

In the aquatic and marine orders of animals there is, besides these
sources of information, the diligent investigation instituted by
certain writers throughout the seas and rivers of Greece, at a time
when every useful fish, and marine and river animals of this class,
mollusca, shell fish, and worms formed part of their food. The time and
manner of their coition, parturition, pregnancy, and life, the nature
of their food, places and manner of taking fish, the times in which
they were not accessible, the faults and diseases of aquatic animals,
were minutely described. The twentieth chapter of the eighth book of
our History is on this subject, where the food and diseases of aquatic
animals are described, and particular notice is taken of their use as
food, besides the observations on the manners of quadrupeds.

It is very evident that the life of one man would hardly suffice for
the observation of all these facts even in a single class of animals;
but, as I have said, there were writers before the time of Aristotle
who provided for the tastes and tables of these fish-eating Greeks a
most exquisite apparatus from the rivers and seas of Greece, especially
in Sicily, which has been remarkable for its wealth ever since the
reigns of Gelo and Hiero, and had surpassed the rest of Greece not only
in its knowledge of nature, but in the art of poetry.

There is a passage in Plato's "Gorgias," (sect. 156, p. 246, ed.
Heind.) where mention is made of "Mithæcus, the author of a work
on Sicilian cookery, and Sarambus, the publican. One furnished the
best of food, the other the best of wine." That the art of choosing
and preparing food for the table was treated of in this book we may
conclude from the use of the word ὁψοποιΐα, which the Greeks especially
used to signify the kinds of fish used for food. A passage from this
book on the manner of cooking the fish called tenia is quoted by
Athenæus, who makes the title of this book ὀψαρτυτικὸν, vii. p. 282,
and xii. p. 506.

We cannot accurately ascertain the age of Mithæcus. The most ancient
author of such a book that we can call to mind is Epicharmus, a
Sicilian poet and physician, from whose fragments, collected by
Athenæus, we may certainly conclude he was acquainted with the nature
of aquatic animals.

To this class we may, in the first place, refer those passages which
are extracted from the drama called the Marriage of Hebe, or the
Muses, and not only teach us the nature of fishes, but also the manner
of procuring and cooking them. A learned writer in the "Literary
Ephemeris" of Jena, 1810, (Nos. 156, 157,) attempted to collect all
these and reduce them to order. There remain, however, many more
passages which the conjectures of the most learned could hardly amend
or explain, from the corruption of the text by librarians and the
variety of Sicilian names. And before the time of Epicharmus, Ananius,
an Iambic poet, nearly contemporary with Hipponactus, an Ionian poet,
composed, among other poems, a similar work on cooking fish, as we
learn from a passage extracted by Athenæus, (vii. p. 282.) After
Epicharmus there was Terpsion, a Sicilian, who was the first to write
a gastrology, in which he taught his disciples from what kind of
food they ought to abstain. He is mentioned by Clearchus Solensis, a
disciple of Aristotle, in his work de Paræmiis, in "Athenæus," (viii.
p. 337.)

Clearchus also mentions Archestratus, the Sicilian, the pupil of
Terpsion, who, after having travelled through the whole of Greece,
wrote a work in heroic verse on the nature of fishes, those especially
which were fit for the table, and on the manner of cooking and
preparing them. We learn that his book was called Ἡδυπάθεια, not only
from the testimony of Athenæus, but from an imitation by Ennius. For
Ennius, who died A.U.C. 584, one hundred and fifty-two years after
the death of Aristotle, translated and in part imitated the poem of
Archestratus, and called his work "Carmina Hedypathetica," as Apulegius
tells us in his "Apologia." We have good reason for supposing that
Archestratus was either contemporary with Aristotle, or a little older.
For Archestratus mentions Diodorus Aspendius, the Pythagorean, as
his contemporary, to whom Timæus, the historian, tells us that the
Epistle of Stratonicus was written ("Athenæus," iv. p. 136). Therefore
Archestratus, Diodorus, Aspendius, and Stratonicus, an eminent harpist,
were contemporaries, and so they were with Aristotle and Demosthenes;
and this conjecture is confirmed by many passages in Athenæus, where
Stratonicus is reported to have been alive with those persons whom
Demosthenes mentions in his orations. Aristotle, therefore, may have
used this work of Archestratus in that part of his Natural History
which treats of the nature of fishes.[230]

[230] To the end of this Essay are appended fragments of Archestratus,
on the fishes of Sicily, amounting to 270 lines of heroic verse,
together with notes, by the author of the Essay.

The writings of physicians who prescribed the food, both of sick and
well, have handed down similar and much more extensive observations
on the animals and fishes which were brought to the tables of the
Greeks. Of this kind Athenæus has given many passages from Dorio, and
Diphilus of Siphnus. Oribasius has made a long extract from the work
of Xenocrates, on the aquatic animals used in food, which I purpose
some day to publish with Xenocrates, if my life should be spared long
enough.﻿As we see that every city is a society, and every society Ed. is
established for some good purpose; for an apparent [Bekker 1252a] good
is the spring of all human actions; it is evident that this is the
principle upon which they are every one founded, and this is more
especially true of that which has for its object the best possible, and
is itself the most excellent, and comprehends all the rest. Now this is
called a city, and the society thereof a political society; for those
who think that the principles of a political, a regal, a family, and
a herile government are the same are mistaken, while they suppose that
each of these differ in the numbers to whom their power extends, but
not in their constitution: so that with them a herile government is one
composed of a very few, a domestic of more, a civil and a regal of still
more, as if there was no difference between a large family and a small
city, or that a regal government and a political one are the same, only
that in the one a single person is continually at the head of public
affairs; in the other, that each member of the state has in his turn a
share in the government, and is at one time a magistrate, at another
a private person, according to the rules of political science. But now
this is not true, as will be evident to any one who will consider this
question in the most approved method. As, in an inquiry into every other
subject, it is necessary to separate the different parts of which it is
compounded, till we arrive at their first elements, which are the most
minute parts thereof; so by the same proceeding we shall acquire a
knowledge of the primary parts of a city and see wherein they differ
from each other, and whether the rules of art will give us any
assistance in examining into each of these things which are mentioned.





CHAPTER II


Now if in this particular science any one would attend to its original
seeds, and their first shoot, he would then as in others have the
subject perfectly before him; and perceive, in the first place, that it
is requisite that those should be joined together whose species cannot
exist without each other, as the male and the female, for the business
of propagation; and this not through choice, but by that natural impulse
which acts both upon plants and animals also, for the purpose of their
leaving behind them others like themselves. It is also from natural
causes that some beings command and others obey, that each may obtain
their mutual safety; for a being who is endowed with a mind capable
of reflection and forethought is by nature the superior and governor,
whereas he whose excellence is merely corporeal is formect to be a
slave; whence it follows that the different state of master [1252b] and
slave is equally advantageous to both. But there is a natural difference
between a female and a slave: for nature is not like the artists
who make the Delphic swords for the use of the poor, but for every
particular purpose she has her separate instruments, and thus her ends
are most complete, for whatsoever is employed on one subject only,
brings that one to much greater perfection than when employed on many;
and yet among the barbarians, a female and a slave are upon a level in
the community, the reason for which is, that amongst them there are none
qualified by nature to govern, therefore their society can be nothing
but between slaves of different sexes. For which reason the poets say,
it is proper for the Greeks to govern the barbarians, as if a barbarian
and a slave were by nature one. Now of these two societies the domestic
is the first, and Hesiod is right when he says, "First a house, then
a wife, then an ox for the plough," for the poor man has always an ox
before a household slave. That society then which nature has established
for daily support is the domestic, and those who compose it are called
by Charondas _homosipuoi_, and by Epimenides the Cretan _homokapnoi_;
but the society of many families, which was first instituted for their
lasting, mutual advantage, is called a village, and a village is most
naturally composed of the descendants of one family, whom some persons
call homogalaktes, the children and the children's children thereof: for
which reason cities were originally governed by kings, as the barbarian
states now are, which are composed of those who had before submitted to
kingly government; for every family is governed by the elder, as are the
branches thereof, on account of their relationship thereunto, which
is what Homer says, "Each one ruled his wife and child;" and in this
scattered manner they formerly lived. And the opinion which universally
prevails, that the gods themselves are subject to kingly government,
arises from hence, that all men formerly were, and many are so now; and
as they imagined themselves to be made in the likeness of the gods, so
they supposed their manner of life must needs be the same. And when many
villages so entirely join themselves together as in every respect to
form but one society, that society is a city, and contains in itself, if
I may so speak, the end and perfection of government: first founded that
we might live, but continued that we may live happily. For which reason
every city must be allowed to be the work of nature, if we admit that
the original society between male and female is; for to this as their
end all subordinate societies tend, and the end of everything is the
nature of it. For what every being is in its most perfect state, that
certainly is the nature of that being, whether it be a man, a horse, or
a house: besides, whatsoever produces the final cause and the end which
we [1253a] desire, must be best; but a government complete in itself is
that final cause and what is best. Hence it is evident that a city is
a natural production, and that man is naturally a political animal, and
that whosoever is naturally and not accidentally unfit for society, must
be either inferior or superior to man: thus the man in Homer, who is
reviled for being "without society, without law, without family." Such
a one must naturally be of a quarrelsome disposition, and as solitary as
the birds. The gift of speech also evidently proves that man is a more
social animal than the bees, or any of the herding cattle: for nature,
as we say, does nothing in vain, and man is the only animal who enjoys
it. Voice indeed, as being the token of pleasure and pain, is imparted
to others also, and thus much their nature is capable of, to perceive
pleasure and pain, and to impart these sensations to others; but it is
by speech that we are enabled to express what is useful for us, and what
is hurtful, and of course what is just and what is unjust: for in
this particular man differs from other animals, that he alone has
a perception of good and evil, of just and unjust, and it is a
participation of these common sentiments which forms a family and a
city. Besides, the notion of a city naturally precedes that of a family
or an individual, for the whole must necessarily be prior to the parts,
for if you take away the whole man, you cannot say a foot or a hand
remains, unless by equivocation, as supposing a hand of stone to be
made, but that would only be a dead one; but everything is understood to
be this or that by its energic qualities and powers, so that when these
no longer remain, neither can that be said to be the same, but something
of the same name. That a city then precedes an individual is plain,
for if an individual is not in himself sufficient to compose a perfect
government, he is to a city as other parts are to a whole; but he that
is incapable of society, or so complete in himself as not to want it,
makes no part of a city, as a beast or a god. There is then in all
persons a natural impetus to associate with each other in this manner,
and he who first founded civil society was the cause of the greatest
good; for as by the completion of it man is the most excellent of all
living beings, so without law and justice he would be the worst of all,
for nothing is so difficult to subdue as injustice in arms: but these
arms man is born with, namely, prudence and valour, which he may apply
to the most opposite purposes, for he who abuses them will be the most
wicked, the most cruel, the most lustful, and most gluttonous being
imaginable; for justice is a political virtue, by the rules of it the
state is regulated, and these rules are the criterion of what is right.





CHAPTER III


SINCE it is now evident of what parts a city is composed, it will be
necessary to treat first of family government, for every city is made
up of families, and every family [1253b] has again its separate parts of
which it is composed. When a family is complete, it consists of freemen
and slaves; but as in every subject we should begin with examining into
the smallest parts of which it consists, and as the first and smallest
parts of a family are the master and slave, the husband and wife, the
father and child, let us first inquire into these three, what each of
them may be, and what they ought to be; that is to say, the herile, the
nuptial, and the paternal. Let these then be considered as the three
distinct parts of a family: some think that the providing what is
necessary for the family is something different from the government of
it, others that this is the greatest part of it; it shall be considered
separately; but we will first speak of a master and a slave, that we
may both understand the nature of those things which are absolutely
necessary, and also try if we can learn anything better on this subject
than what is already known. Some persons have thought that the power of
the master over his slave originates from his superior knowledge, and
that this knowledge is the same in the master, the magistrate, and the
king, as we have already said; but others think that herile government
is contrary to nature, and that it is the law which makes one man a
slave and another free, but that in nature there is no difference; for
which reason that power cannot be founded in justice, but in force.




CHAPTER IV


Since then a subsistence is necessary in every family, the means of
procuring it certainly makes up part of the management of a family, for
without necessaries it is impossible to live, and to live well. As
in all arts which are brought to perfection it is necessary that they
should have their proper instruments if they would complete their works,
so is it in the art of managing a family: now of instruments some of
them are alive, others inanimate; thus with respect to the pilot of the
ship, the tiller is without life, the sailor is alive; for a servant
is as an instrument in many arts. Thus property is as an instrument
to living; an estate is a multitude of instruments; so a slave is an
animated instrument, but every one that can minister of himself is more
valuable than any other instrument; for if every instrument, at command,
or from a preconception of its master's will, could accomplish its work
(as the story goes of the statues of Daedalus; or what the poet tells us
of the tripods of Vulcan, "that they moved of their own accord into the
assembly of the gods "), the shuttle would then weave, and the lyre play
of itself; nor would the architect want servants, or the [1254a] master
slaves. Now what are generally called instruments are the efficients
of something else, but possessions are what we simply use: thus with a
shuttle we make something else for our use; but we only use a coat, or a
bed: since then making and using differ from each other in species, and
they both require their instruments, it is necessary that these should
be different from each other. Now life is itself what we use, and not
what we employ as the efficient of something else; for which reason the
services of a slave are for use. A possession may be considered in the
same nature as a part of anything; now a part is not only a part of
something, but also is nothing else; so is a possession; therefore a
master is only the master of the slave, but no part of him; but the
slave is not only the slave of the master, but nothing else but that.
This fully explains what is the nature of a slave, and what are his
capacities; for that being who by nature is nothing of himself, but
totally another's, and is a man, is a slave by nature; and that man who
is the property of another, is his mere chattel, though he continues a
man; but a chattel is an instrument for use, separate from the body.




CHAPTER V


But whether any person is such by nature, and whether it is advantageous
and just for any one to be a slave or no, or whether all slavery is
contrary to nature, shall be considered hereafter; not that it is
difficult to determine it upon general principles, or to understand
it from matters of fact; for that some should govern, and others be
governed, is not only necessary but useful, and from the hour of their
birth some are marked out for those purposes, and others for the other,
and there are many species of both sorts. And the better those are who
are governed the better also is the government, as for instance of man,
rather than the brute creation: for the more excellent the materials
are with which the work is finished, the more excellent certainly is the
work; and wherever there is a governor and a governed, there certainly
is some work produced; for whatsoever is composed of many parts, which
jointly become one, whether conjunct or separate, evidently show the
marks of governing and governed; and this is true of every living thing
in all nature; nay, even in some things which partake not of life, as
in music; but this probably would be a disquisition too foreign to our
present purpose. Every living thing in the first place is composed of
soul and body, of these the one is by nature the governor, the other the
governed; now if we would know what is natural, we ought to search for
it in those subjects in which nature appears most perfect, and not in
those which are corrupted; we should therefore examine into a man who
is most perfectly formed both in soul and body, in whom this is evident,
for in the depraved and vicious the body seems [1254b] to rule rather
than the soul, on account of their being corrupt and contrary to nature.
We may then, as we affirm, perceive in an animal the first principles
of herile and political government; for the soul governs the body as the
master governs his slave; the mind governs the appetite with a political
or a kingly power, which shows that it is both natural and advantageous
that the body should be governed by the soul, and the pathetic part by
the mind, and that part which is possessed of reason; but to have no
ruling power, or an improper one, is hurtful to all; and this holds
true not only of man, but of other animals also, for tame animals are
naturally better than wild ones, and it is advantageous that both should
be under subjection to man; for this is productive of their common
safety: so is it naturally with the male and the female; the one is
superior, the other inferior; the one governs, the other is governed;
and the same rule must necessarily hold good with respect to all
mankind. Those men therefore who are as much inferior to others as the
body is to the soul, are to be thus disposed of, as the proper use of
them is their bodies, in which their excellence consists; and if what I
have said be true, they are slaves by nature, and it is advantageous to
them to be always under government. He then is by nature formed a slave
who is qualified to become the chattel of another person, and on that
account is so, and who has just reason enough to know that there is such
a faculty, without being indued with the use of it; for other animals
have no perception of reason, but are entirely guided by appetite,
and indeed they vary very little in their use from each other; for the
advantage which we receive, both from slaves and tame animals, arises
from their bodily strength administering to our necessities; for it
is the intention of nature to make the bodies of slaves and freemen
different from each other, that the one should be robust for their
necessary purposes, the others erect, useless indeed for what slaves are
employed in, but fit for civil life, which is divided into the duties of
war and peace; though these rules do not always take place, for slaves
have sometimes the bodies of freemen, sometimes the souls; if then it
is evident that if some bodies are as much more excellent than others as
the statues of the gods excel the human form, every one will allow that
the inferior ought to be slaves to the superior; and if this is true
with respect to the body, it is still juster to determine in the same
manner, when we consider the soul; though it is not so easy to perceive
the beauty of [1255a] the soul as it is of the body. Since then some
men are slaves by nature, and others are freemen, it is clear that where
slavery is advantageous to any one, then it is just to make him a slave.




CHAPTER VI


But it is not difficult to perceive that those who maintain the contrary
opinion have some reason on their side; for a man may become a slave two
different ways; for he may be so by law also, and this law is a certain
compact, by which whatsoever is taken in battle is adjudged to be the
property of the conquerors: but many persons who are conversant in law
call in question this pretended right, and say that it would be hard
that a man should be compelled by violence to be the slave and subject
of another who had the power to compel him, and was his superior in
strength; and upon this subject, even of those who are wise, some think
one way and some another; but the cause of this doubt and variety of
opinions arises from hence, that great abilities, when accompanied with
proper means, are generally able to succeed by force: for victory is
always owing to a superiority in some advantageous circumstances; so
that it seems that force never prevails but in consequence of great
abilities. But still the dispute concerning the justice of it remains;
for some persons think, that justice consists in benevolence, others
think it just that the powerful should govern: in the midst of these
contrary opinions, there are no reasons sufficient to convince us, that
the right of being master and governor ought not to be placed with those
who have the greatest abilities. Some persons, entirely resting upon the
right which the law gives (for that which is legal is in some respects
just), insist upon it that slavery occasioned by war is just, not that
they say it is wholly so, for it may happen that the principle upon
which the wars were commenced is unjust; moreover no one will say that a
man who is unworthily in slavery is therefore a slave; for if so, men of
the noblest families might happen to be slaves, and the descendants of
slaves, if they should chance to be taken prisoners in war and sold: to
avoid this difficulty they say that such persons should not be called
slaves, but barbarians only should; but when they say this, they do
nothing more than inquire who is a slave by nature, which was what we
at first said; for we must acknowledge that there are some persons
who, wherever they are, must necessarily be slaves, but others in no
situation; thus also it is with those of noble descent: it is not only
in their own country that they are Esteemed as such, but everywhere,
but the barbarians are respected on this account at home only; as if
nobility and freedom were of two sorts, the one universal, the other not
so. Thus says the Helen of Theodectes:

  "Who dares reproach me with the name of slave? When from the
immortal gods, on either side, I draw my lineage."

Those who express sentiments like these, shew only that they distinguish
the slave and the freeman, the noble and the ignoble from each other
by their virtues and their [1255b] vices; for they think it reasonable,
that as a man begets a man, and a beast a beast, so from a good man, a
good man should be descended; and this is what nature desires to do, but
frequently cannot accomplish it. It is evident then that this doubt
has some reason in it, and that these persons are not slaves, and those
freemen, by the appointment of nature; and also that in some instances
it is sufficiently clear, that it is advantageous to both parties for
this man to be a slave, and that to be a master, and that it is right
and just, that some should be governed, and others govern, in the manner
that nature intended; of which sort of government is that which a master
exercises over a slave. But to govern ill is disadvantageous to both;
for the same thing is useful to the part and to the whole, to the body
and to the soul; but the slave is as it were a part of the master, as if
he were an animated part of his body, though separate. For which reason
a mutual utility and friendship may subsist between the master and the
slave, I mean when they are placed by nature in that relation to each
other, for the contrary takes place amongst those who are reduced to
slavery by the law, or by conquest.




CHAPTER VII


It is evident from what has been said, that a herile and a political
government are not the same, or that all governments are alike to each
other, as some affirm; for one is adapted to the nature of freemen, the
other to that of slaves. Domestic government is a monarchy, for that is
what prevails in every house; but a political state is the government of
free men and equals. The master is not so called from his knowing how to
manage his slave, but because he is so; for the same reason a slave and
a freeman have their respective appellations. There is also one sort of
knowledge proper for a master, another for a slave; the slave's is of
the nature of that which was taught by a slave at Syracuse; for he for
a stipulated sum instructed the boys in all the business of a household
slave, of which there are various sorts to be learnt, as the art of
cookery, and other such-like services, of which some are allotted to
some, and others to others; some employments being more honourable,
others more necessary; according to the proverb, "One slave excels
another, one master excels another:" in such-like things the knowledge
of a slave consists. The knowledge of the master is to be able properly
to employ his slaves, for the mastership of slaves is the employment,
not the mere possession of them; not that this knowledge contains
anything great or respectable; for what a slave ought to know how to do,
that a master ought to know how to order; for which reason, those who
have it in their power to be free from these low attentions, employ a
steward for this business, and apply themselves either to public affairs
or philosophy: the knowledge of procuring what is necessary for a family
is different from that which belongs either to the master or the slave:
and to do this justly must be either by war or hunting. And thus much of
the difference between a master and a slave.




CHAPTER VIII


[1256a] As a slave is a particular species of property, let us by
all means inquire into the nature of property in general, and the
acquisition of money, according to the manner we have proposed. In the
first place then, some one may doubt whether the getting of money is
the same thing as economy, or whether it is a part of it, or something
subservient to it; and if so, whether it is as the art of making
shuttles is to the art of weaving, or the art of making brass to that
of statue founding, for they are not of the same service; for the one
supplies the tools, the other the matter: by the matter I mean the
subject out of which the work is finished, as wool for the cloth and
brass for the statue. It is evident then that the getting of money is
not the same thing as economy, for the business of the one is to furnish
the means of the other to use them; and what art is there employed in
the management of a family but economy, but whether this is a part of
it, or something of a different species, is a doubt; for if it is
the business of him who is to get money to find out how riches and
possessions may be procured, and both these arise from various
causes, we must first inquire whether the art of husbandry is part of
money-getting or something different, and in general, whether the same
is not true of every acquisition and every attention which relates to
provision. But as there are many sorts of provision, so are the methods
of living both of man and the brute creation very various; and as it is
impossible to live without food, the difference in that particular makes
the lives of animals so different from each other. Of beasts, some
live in herds, others separate, as is most convenient for procuring
themselves food; as some of them live upon flesh, others on fruit, and
others on whatsoever they light on, nature having so distinguished
their course of life, that they can very easily procure themselves
subsistence; and as the same things are not agreeable to all, but one
animal likes one thing and another another, it follows that the lives
of those beasts who live upon flesh must be different from the lives of
those who live on fruits; so is it with men, their lives differ greatly
from each other; and of all these the shepherd's is the idlest, for they
live upon the flesh of tame animals, without any trouble, while they are
obliged to change their habitations on account of their flocks, which
they are compelled to follow, cultivating, as it were, a living farm.
Others live exercising violence over living creatures, one pursuing this
thing, another that, these preying upon men; those who live near lakes
and marshes and rivers, or the sea itself, on fishing, while others are
fowlers, or hunters of wild beasts; but the greater part of mankind live
upon the produce of the earth and its cultivated fruits; and the manner
in which all those live who follow the direction of nature, and labour
for their own subsistence, is nearly the same, without ever thinking
to procure any provision by way of exchange or merchandise, such are
shepherds, husband-men, [1256b] robbers, fishermen, and hunters: some
join different employments together, and thus live very agreeably;
supplying those deficiencies which were wanting to make their
subsistence depend upon themselves only: thus, for instance, the same
person shall be a shepherd and a robber, or a husbandman and a hunter;
and so with respect to the rest, they pursue that mode of life which
necessity points out. This provision then nature herself seems to have
furnished all animals with, as well immediately upon their first origin
as also when they are arrived at a state of maturity; for at the first
of these periods some of them are provided in the womb with proper
nourishment, which continues till that which is born can get food for
itself, as is the case with worms and birds; and as to those which bring
forth their young alive, they have the means for their subsistence for a
certain time within themselves, namely milk. It is evident then that we
may conclude of those things that are, that plants are created for the
sake of animals, and animals for the sake of men; the tame for our use
and provision; the wild, at least the greater part, for our provision
also, or for some other advantageous purpose, as furnishing us with
clothes, and the like. As nature therefore makes nothing either
imperfect or in vain, it necessarily follows that she has made all these
things for men: for which reason what we gain in war is in a certain
degree a natural acquisition; for hunting is a part of it, which it is
necessary for us to employ against wild beasts; and those men who being
intended by nature for slavery are unwilling to submit to it, on which
occasion such a. war is by nature just: that species of acquisition then
only which is according to nature is part of economy; and this ought to
be at hand, or if not, immediately procured, namely, what is necessary
to be kept in store to live upon, and which are useful as well for the
state as the family. And true riches seem to consist in these; and the
acquisition of those possessions which are necessary for a happy life is
not infinite; though Solon says otherwise in this verse:

  "No bounds to riches can be fixed for man;"

for they may be fixed as in other arts; for the instruments of no art
whatsoever are infinite, either in their number or their magnitude; but
riches are a number of instruments in domestic and civil economy; it is
therefore evident that the acquisition of certain things according
to nature is a part both of domestic and civil economy, and for what
reason.




CHAPTER IX


There is also another species of acquisition which they [1257a]
particularly call pecuniary, and with great propriety; and by this
indeed it seems that there are no bounds to riches and wealth. Now many
persons suppose, from their near relation to each other, that this is
one and the same with that we have just mentioned, but it is not the
same as that, though not very different; one of these is natural, the
other is not, but rather owing to some art and skill; we will enter into
a particular examination of this subject. The uses of every possession
are two, both dependent upon the thing itself, but not in the same
manner, the one supposing an inseparable connection with it, the other
not; as a shoe, for instance, which may be either worn, or exchanged
for something else, both these are the uses of the shoe; for he who
exchanges a shoe with some man who wants one, for money or provisions,
uses the shoe as a shoe, but not according to the original intention,
for shoes were not at first made to be exchanged. The same thing holds
true of all other possessions; for barter, in general, had its original
beginning in nature, some men having a surplus, others too little of
what was necessary for them: hence it is evident, that the selling
provisions for money is not according to the natural use of things; for
they were obliged to use barter for those things which they wanted; but
it is plain that barter could have no place in the first, that is to
say, in family society; but must have begun when the number of those
who composed the community was enlarged: for the first of these had all
things in common; but when they came to be separated they were obliged
to exchange with each other many different things which both parties
wanted. Which custom of barter is still preserved amongst many barbarous
nations, who procure one necessary with another, but never sell
anything; as giving and receiving wine for corn and the like. This
sort of barter is not contradictory to nature, nor is it any species of
money-getting; but is necessary in procuring that subsistence which is
so consonant thereunto. But this barter introduced the use of money, as
might be expected; for a convenient place from whence to import what you
wanted, or to export what you had a surplus of, being often at a great
distance, money necessarily made its way into commerce; for it is not
everything which is naturally most useful that is easiest of carriage;
for which reason they invented something to exchange with each other
which they should mutually give and take, that being really valuable
itself, should have the additional advantage of being of easy
conveyance, for the purposes of life, as iron and silver, or anything
else of the same nature: and this at first passed in value simply
according to its weight or size; but in process of time it had a certain
stamp, to save the trouble of weighing, which stamp expressed its value.
[1257b]

Money then being established as the necessary medium of exchange,
another species of money-getting soon took place, namely, by buying
and selling, at probably first in a simple manner, afterwards with more
skill and experience, where and how the greatest profits might be made.
For which reason the art of money-getting seems to be chiefly conversant
about trade, and the business of it to be able to tell where the
greatest profits can be made, being the means of procuring abundance
of wealth and possessions: and thus wealth is very often supposed to
consist in the quantity of money which any one possesses, as this is the
medium by which all trade is conducted and a fortune made, others again
regard it as of no value, as being of none by nature, but arbitrarily
made so by compact; so that if those who use it should alter their
sentiments, it would be worth nothing, as being of no service for
any necessary purpose. Besides, he who abounds in money often wants
necessary food; and it is impossible to say that any person is in good
circumstances when with all his possessions he may perish with hunger.

Like Midas in the fable, who from his insatiable wish had everything he
touched turned into gold. For which reason others endeavour to procure
other riches and other property, and rightly, for there are other riches
and property in nature; and these are the proper objects of economy:
while trade only procures money, not by all means, but by the exchange
of it, and for that purpose it is this which it is chiefly employed
about, for money is the first principle and the end of trade; nor are
there any bounds to be set to what is thereby acquired. Thus also there
are no limits to the art of medicine, with respect to the health which
it attempts to procure; the same also is true of all other arts; no line
can be drawn to terminate their bounds, the several professors of them
being desirous to extend them as far as possible. (But still the means
to be employed for that purpose are limited; and these are the limits
beyond which the art cannot proceed.) Thus in the art of acquiring
riches there are no limits, for the object of that is money and
possessions; but economy has a boundary, though this has not: for
acquiring riches is not the business of that, for which reason it should
seem that some boundary should be set to riches, though we see the
contrary to this is what is practised; for all those who get riches add
to their money without end; the cause of which is the near connection
of these two arts with each other, which sometimes occasions the one to
change employments with the other, as getting of money is their common
object: for economy requires the possession of wealth, but not on
its own account but with another view, to purchase things necessary
therewith; but the other procures it merely to increase it: so that some
persons are confirmed in their belief, that this is the proper object
of economy, and think that for this purpose money should be saved and
hoarded up without end; the reason for which disposition is, that they
are intent upon living, but not upon living well; and this desire being
boundless in its extent, the means which they aim at for that purpose
are boundless also; and those who propose to live well, often confine
that to the enjoyment of the pleasures of sense; so that as this also
seems to depend upon what a man has, all their care is to get money,
and hence arises the other cause for this art; for as this enjoyment is
excessive in its degree, they endeavour to procure means proportionate
to supply it; and if they cannot do this merely by the art of dealing in
money, they will endeavour to do it by other ways, and apply all their
powers to a purpose they were not by nature intended for. Thus, for
instance, courage was intended to inspire fortitude, not to get money
by; neither is this the end of the soldier's or the physician's art,
but victory and health. But such persons make everything subservient to
money-getting, as if this was the only end; and to the end everything
ought to refer.

We have now considered that art of money-getting which is not necessary,
and have seen in what manner we became in want of it; and also that
which is necessary, which is different from it; for that economy which
is natural, and whose object is to provide food, is not like this
unlimited in its extent, but has its bounds.




CHAPTER X


We have now determined what was before doubtful, whether or no the art
of getting money is his business who is at the head of a family or a
state, and though not strictly so, it is however very necessary; for
as a politician does not make men, but receiving them from the hand of
nature employs them to proper purposes; thus the earth, or the sea, or
something else ought to supply them with provisions, and this it is the
business of the master of the family to manage properly; for it is not
the weaver's business to make yarn, but to use it, and to distinguish
what is good and useful from what is bad and of no service; and indeed
some one may inquire why getting money should be a part of economy when
the art of healing is not, as it is as requisite that the family should
be in health as that they should eat, or have anything else which is
necessary; and as it is indeed in some particulars the business both of
the master of the family, and he to whom the government of the state
is entrusted, to see after the health of those under their care, but in
others not, but the physician's; so also as to money; in some respects
it is the business of the master of the family, in others not, but of
the servant; but as we have already said, it is chiefly nature's, for
it is her part to supply her offspring with food; for everything finds
nourishment left for it in what produced it; for which reason
the natural riches of all men arise from fruits and animals. Now
money-making, as we say, being twofold, it may be applied to two
purposes, the service of the house or retail trade; of which the first
is necessary and commendable, the other justly censurable; for it has
not its origin in [1258b] nature, but by it men gain from each other;
for usury is most reasonably detested, as it is increasing our fortune
by money itself, and not employing it for the purpose it was originally
intended, namely exchange.

And this is the explanation of the name (TOKOS), which means the
breeding of money. For as offspring resemble their parents, so usury
is money bred of money. Whence of all forms of money-making it is most
against nature.




CHAPTER XI


Having already sufficiently considered the general principles of this
subject, let us now go into the practical part thereof; the one is a
liberal employment for the mind, the other necessary. These things are
useful in the management of one's affairs; to be skilful in the nature
of cattle, which are most profitable, and where, and how; as for
instance, what advantage will arise from keeping horses, or oxen, or
sheep, or any other live stock; it is also necessary to be acquainted
with the comparative value of these things, and which of them in
particular places are worth most; for some do better in one place, some
in another. Agriculture also should be understood, and the management
of arable grounds and orchards; and also the care of bees, and fish, and
birds, from whence any profit may arise; these are the first and most
proper parts of domestic management.

With respect to gaining money by exchange, the principal method of doing
this is by merchandise, which is carried on in three different ways,
either by sending the commodity for sale by sea or by land, or else
selling it on the place where it grows; and these differ from each other
in this, that the one is more profitable, the other safer. The second
method is by usury. The third by receiving wages for work done, and
this either by being employed in some mean art, or else in mere bodily
labour. There is also a third species of improving a fortune, that is
something between this and the first; for it partly depends upon
nature, partly upon exchange; the subject of which is, things that are
immediately from the earth, or their produce, which, though they bear
no fruit, are yet useful, such as selling of timber and the whole art of
metallurgy, which includes many different species, for there are various
sorts of things dug out of the earth.

These we have now mentioned in general, but to enter into particulars
concerning each of them, though it might be useful to the artist, would
be tiresome to dwell on. Now of all the works of art, those are the most
excellent wherein chance has the least to do, and those are the meanest
which deprave the body, those the most servile in which bodily strength
alone is chiefly wanted, those most illiberal which require least skill;
but as there are books written on these subjects by some persons, as
by Chares the Panian, and Apollodorus the Lemnian, upon husbandry and
planting; and by others on other matters, [1259b] let those who have
occasion consult them thereon; besides, every person should collect
together whatsoever he hears occasionally mentioned, by means of which
many of those who aimed at making a fortune have succeeded in their
intentions; for all these are useful to those who make a point of
getting money, as in the contrivance of Thales the Milesian (which was
certainly a gainful one, but as it was his it was attributed to
his wisdom, though the method he used was a general one, and would
universally succeed), when they reviled him for his poverty, as if the
study of philosophy was useless: for they say that he, perceiving by his
skill in astrology that there would be great plenty of olives that year,
while it was yet winter, having got a little money, he gave earnest for
all the oil works that were in Miletus and Chios, which he hired at a
low price, there being no one to bid against him; but when the season
came for making oil, many persons wanting them, he all at once let them
upon what terms he pleased; and raising a large sum of money by that
means, convinced them that it was easy for philosophers to be rich if
they chose it, but that that was not what they aimed at; in this manner
is Thales said to have shown his wisdom. It indeed is, as we have
said, generally gainful for a person to contrive to make a monopoly of
anything; for which reason some cities also take this method when they
want money, and monopolise their commodities. There was a certain person
in Sicily who laid out a sum of money which was deposited in his hand in
buying up all the iron from the iron merchants; so that when the dealers
came from the markets to purchase, there was no one had any to sell but
himself; and though he put no great advance upon it, yet by laying out
fifty talents he made an hundred. When Dionysius heard this he permitted
him to take his money with him, but forbid him to continue any longer in
Sicily, as being one who contrived means for getting money inconsistent
with his affairs. This man's view and Thales's was exactly the same;
both of them contrived to procure a monopoly for themselves: it is
useful also for politicians to understand these things, for many states
want to raise money and by such means, as well as private families,
nay more so; for which reason some persons who are employed in the
management of public affairs confine themselves to this province only.




CHAPTER XII


There are then three parts of domestic government, the masters, of
which we have already treated, the fathers, and the husbands; now the
government of the wife and children should both be that of free persons,
but not the [I259b] same; for the wife should be treated as a citizen of
a free state, the children should be under kingly power; for the male is
by nature superior to the female, except when something happens contrary
to the usual course of nature, as is the elder and perfect to the
younger and imperfect. Now in the generality of free states, the
governors and the governed alternately change place; for an equality
without any preference is what nature chooses; however, when one
governs and another is governed, she endeavours that there should be a
distinction between them in forms, expressions, and honours; according
to what Amasis said of his laver. This then should be the established
rule between the man and the woman. The government of children should
be kingly; for the power of the father over the child is founded in
affection and seniority, which is a species of kingly government; for
which reason Homer very properly calls Jupiter "the father of gods and
men," who was king of both these; for nature requires that a king should
be of the same species with those whom he governs, though superior in
some particulars, as is the case between the elder and the younger, the
father and the son.




CHAPTER XIII


It is evident then that in the due government of a family, greater
attention should be paid to the several members of it and their virtues
than to the possessions or riches of it; and greater to the freemen
than the slaves: but here some one may doubt whether there is any other
virtue in a slave than his organic services, and of higher estimation
than these, as temperance, fortitude, justice, and such-like habits, or
whether they possess only bodily qualities: each side of the question
has its difficulties; for if they possess these virtues, wherein do
they differ from freemen? and that they do not, since they are men,
and partakers of reason, is absurd. Nearly the same inquiry may be made
concerning a woman and a child, whether these also have their proper
virtues; whether a woman ought to be temperate, brave, and just, and
whether a child is temperate or no; and indeed this inquiry ought to be
general, whether the virtues of those who, by nature, either govern or
are governed, are the same or different; for if it is necessary that
both of them should partake of the fair and good, why is it also
necessary that, without exception, the one should govern, the other
always be governed? for this cannot arise from their possessing these
qualities in different degrees; for to govern, and to be governed, are
things different in species, but more or less are not. And yet it is
wonderful that one party ought to have them, and the other not; for if
he who is to govern should not be temperate and just, how can he govern
well? or if he is to be governed, how can he be governed well? for he
who is intemperate [1260a] and a coward will never do what he ought: it
is evident then that both parties ought to be virtuous; but there is a
difference between them, as there is between those who by nature command
and who by nature obey, and this originates in the soul; for in this
nature has planted the governing and submitting principle, the virtues
of which we say are different, as are those of a rational and an
irrational being. It is plain then that the same principle may be
extended farther, and that there are in nature a variety of things which
govern and are governed; for a freeman is governed in a different manner
from a slave, a male from a female, and a man from a child: and all
these have parts of mind within them, but in a different manner. Thus
a slave can have no power of determination, a woman but a weak one, a
child an imperfect one. Thus also must it necessarily be with respect to
moral virtues; all must be supposed to possess them, but not in the
same manner, but as is best suited to every one's employment; on which
account he who is to govern ought to be perfect in moral virtue, for his
business is entirely that of an architect, and reason is the architect;
while others want only that portion of it which may be sufficient for
their station; from whence it is evident, that although moral virtue is
common to all those we have spoken of, yet the temperance of a man and
a woman are not the same, nor their courage, nor their justice, though
Socrates thought otherwise; for the courage of the man consists in
commanding, the woman's in obeying; and the same is true in other
particulars: and this will be evident to those who will examine
different virtues separately; for those who use general terms deceive
themselves when they say, that virtue consists in a good disposition of
mind, or doing what is right, or something of this sort. They do much
better who enumerate the different virtues as Georgias did, than those
who thus define them; and as Sophocles speaks of a woman, we think
of all persons, that their 'virtues should be applicable to their
characters, for says he,

  "Silence is a woman's ornament,"

but it is not a man's; and as a child is incomplete, it is evident that
his virtue is not to be referred to himself in his present situation,
but to that in which he will be complete, and his preceptor. In like
manner the virtue of a slave is to be referred to his master; for we
laid it down as a maxim, that the use of a slave was to employ him in
what you wanted; so that it is clear enough that few virtues are wanted
in his station, only that he may not neglect his work through idleness
or fear: some person may question if what I have said is true, whether
virtue is not necessary for artificers in their calling, for they often
through idleness neglect their work, but the difference between them
is very great; for a slave is connected with you for life, but the
artificer not so nearly: as near therefore as the artificer approaches
to the situation of a slave, just so much ought he to have of the
virtues of one; for a mean artificer is to a certain point a slave; but
then a slave is one of those things which are by nature what they are,
but this is not true [1260b] of a shoemaker, or any other artist. It is
evident then that a slave ought to be trained to those virtues which are
proper for his situation by his master; and not by him who has the power
of a master, to teach him any particular art. Those therefore are in the
wrong who would deprive slaves of reason, and say that they have only to
follow their orders; for slaves want more instruction than children, and
thus we determine this matter. It is necessary, I am sensible, for every
one who treats upon government, to enter particularly into the relations
of husband and wife, and of parent and child, and to show what are the
virtues of each and their respective connections with each other; what
is right and what is wrong; and how the one ought to be followed, and
the other avoided. Since then every family is part of a city, and each
of those individuals is part of a family, and the virtue of the parts
ought to correspond to the virtue of the whole; it is necessary, that
both the wives and children of the community should be instructed
correspondent to the nature thereof, if it is of consequence to the
virtue of the state, that the wives and children therein should be
virtuous, and of consequence it certainly is, for the wives are one half
of the free persons; and of the children the succeeding citizens are to
be formed. As then we have determined these points, we will leave
the rest to be spoken to in another place, as if the subject was now
finished; and beginning again anew, first consider the sentiments of
those who have treated of the most perfect forms of government.




BOOK II




CHAPTER I


Since then we propose to inquire what civil society is of all others
best for those who have it in their power to live entirely as they wish,
it is necessary to examine into the polity of those states which are
allowed to be well governed; and if there should be any others which
some persons have described, and which appear properly regulated, to
note what is right and useful in them; and when we point out wherein
they have failed, let not this be imputed to an affectation of wisdom,
for it is because there are great defects in all those which are already
established, that I have been induced to undertake this work. We will
begin with that part of the subject which naturally presents itself
first to our consideration. The members of every state must of necessity
have all things in common, or some things common, and not others,
or nothing at all common. To have nothing in common is evidently
impossible, for society itself is one species of [1261a] community; and
the first thing necessary thereunto is a common place of habitation,
namely the city, which must be one, and this every citizen must have a
share in. But in a government which is to be well founded, will it be
best to admit of a community in everything which is capable thereof, or
only in some particulars, but in others not? for it is possible that the
citizens may have their wives, and children, and goods in common, as
in Plato's Commonwealth; for in that Socrates affirms that all these
particulars ought to be so. Which then shall we prefer? the custom which
is already established, or the laws which are proposed in that treatise?




CHAPTER II


Now as a community of wives is attended with many other difficulties, so
neither does the cause for which he would frame his government in this
manner seem agreeable to reason, nor is it capable of producing that end
which he has proposed, and for which he says it ought to take place; nor
has he given any particular directions for putting it in practice. Now
I also am willing to agree with Socrates in the principle which he
proceeds upon, and admit that the city ought to be one as much as
possible; and yet it is evident that if it is contracted too much, it
will be no longer a city, for that necessarily supposes a multitude; so
that if we proceed in this manner, we shall reduce a city to a family,
and a family to a single person: for we admit that a family is one in a
greater degree than a city, and a single person than a family; so that
if this end could be obtained, it should never be put in practice, as it
would annihilate the city; for a city does not only consist of a large
number of inhabitants, but there must also be different sorts; for were
they all alike, there could be no city; for a confederacy and a city are
two different things; for a confederacy is valuable from its numbers,
although all those who compose it are men of the same calling; for this
is entered into for the sake of mutual defence, as we add an additional
weight to make the scale go down. The same distinction prevails between
a city and a nation when the people are not collected into separate
villages, but live as the Arcadians. Now those things in which a city
should be one are of different sorts, and in preserving an alternate
reciprocation of power between these, the safety thereof consists (as
I have already mentioned in my treatise on Morals), for amongst freemen
and equals this is absolutely necessary; for all cannot govern at the
same time, but either by the year, or according to some other regulation
or time, by which means every one in his turn will be in office; as
if the shoemakers and carpenters should exchange occupations, and not
always be employed in the same calling. But as it is evidently better,
that these should continue to exercise their respective trades; so also
in civil society, where it is possible, it would be better that the
government should continue in the same hands; but where it [1261b] is
not (as nature has made all men equal, and therefore it is just, be the
administration good or bad, that all should partake of it), there it is
best to observe a rotation, and let those who are their equals by turns
submit to those who are at that time magistrates, as they will, in their
turns, alternately be governors and governed, as if they were different
men: by the same method different persons will execute different
offices. From hence it is evident, that a city cannot be one in the
manner that some persons propose; and that what has been said to be the
greatest good which it could enjoy, is absolutely its destruction, which
cannot be: for the good of anything is that which preserves it.
For another reason also it is clear, that it is not for the best
to endeavour to make a city too much one, because a family is more
sufficient in itself than a single person, a city than a family; and
indeed Plato supposes that a city owes its existence to that sufficiency
in themselves which the members of it enjoy. If then this sufficiency is
so desirable, the less the city is one the better.




CHAPTER III


But admitting that it is most advantageous for a city to be one as much
as possible, it does not seem to follow that this will take place by
permitting all at once to say this is mine, and this is not mine (though
this is what Socrates regards as a proof that a city is entirely one),
for the word All is used in two senses; if it means each individual,
what Socrates proposes will nearly take place; for each person will
say, this is his own son, and his own wife, and his own property, and
of everything else that may happen to belong to him, that it is his own.
But those who have their wives and children in common will not say so,
but all will say so, though not as individuals; therefore, to use the
word all is evidently a fallacious mode of speech; for this word is
sometimes used distributively, and sometimes collectively, on account
of its double meaning, and is the cause of inconclusive syllogisms in
reasoning. Therefore for all persons to say the same thing was their
own, using the word all in its distributive sense, would be well, but is
impossible: in its collective sense it would by no means contribute to
the concord of the state. Besides, there would be another inconvenience
attending this proposal, for what is common to many is taken least care
of; for all men regard more what is their own than what others share
with them in, to which they pay less attention than is incumbent on
every one: let me add also, that every one is more negligent of what
another is to see to, as well as himself, than of his own private
business; as in a family one is often worse served by many servants than
by a few. Let each citizen then in the state have a thousand children,
but let none of them be considered as the children of that individual,
but let the relation of father and child be common to them all, and they
will all be neglected. Besides, in consequence of this, [1262a] whenever
any citizen behaved well or ill, every person, be the number what it
would, might say, this is my son, or this man's or that; and in
this manner would they speak, and thus would they doubt of the whole
thousand, or of whatever number the city consisted; and it would be
uncertain to whom each child belonged, and when it was born, who was to
take care of it: and which do you think is better, for every one to say
this is mine, while they may apply it equally to two thousand or ten
thousand; or as we say, this is mine in our present forms of government,
where one man calls another his son, another calls that same person
his brother, another nephew, or some other relation, either by blood
or marriage, and first extends his care to him and his, while another
regards him as one of the same parish and the same tribe; and it is
better for any one to be a nephew in his private capacity than a son
after that manner. Besides, it will be impossible to prevent some
persons from suspecting that they are brothers and sisters, fathers and
mothers to each other; for, from the mutual likeness there is between
the sire and the offspring, they will necessarily conclude in what
relation they stand to each other, which circumstance, we are informed
by those writers who describe different parts of the world, does
sometimes happen; for in Upper Africa there are wives in common who
yet deliver their children to their respective fathers, being guided
by their likeness to them. There are also some mares and cows which
naturally bring forth their young so like the male, that we can easily
distinguish by which of them they were impregnated: such was the mare
called Just, in Pharsalia.




CHAPTER IV


Besides, those who contrive this plan of community cannot easily avoid
the following evils; namely, blows, murders involuntary or voluntary,
quarrels, and reproaches, all which it would be impious indeed to be
guilty of towards our fathers and mothers, or those who are nearly
related to us; though not to those who are not connected to us by any
tie of affinity: and certainly these mischiefs must necessarily happen
oftener amongst those who do not know how they are connected to each
other than those who do; and when they do happen, if it is among the
first of these, they admit of a legal expiation, but amongst the latter
that cannot be done. It is also absurd for those who promote a
community of children to forbid those who love each other from indulging
themselves in the last excesses of that passion, while they do not
restrain them from the passion itself, or those intercourses which are
of all things most improper, between a Father and a son, a brother and
a brother, and indeed the thing itself is most absurd. It is also
ridiculous to prevent this intercourse between the nearest relations,
for no other reason than the violence of the pleasure, while they think
that the relation of father and daughter, the brother and sister, is of
no consequence at all. It seems also more advantageous for the state,
that the husbandmen should have their wives and children in common than
the military, for there will be less affection [1262b] among them
in that case than when otherwise; for such persons ought to be under
subjection, that they may obey the laws, and not seek after innovations.
Upon the whole, the consequences of such a law as this would be directly
contrary to those things which good laws ought to establish, and which
Socrates endeavoured to establish by his regulations concerning women
and children: for we think that friendship is the greatest good which
can happen to any city, as nothing so much prevents seditions: and amity
in a city is what Socrates commends above all things, which appears
to be, as indeed he says, the effect of friendship; as we learn from
Aristophanes in the Erotics, who says, that those who love one another
from the excess of that passion, desire to breathe the same soul, and
from being two to be blended into one: from whence it would necessarily
follow, that both or one of them must be destroyed. But now in a city
which admits of this community, the tie of friendship must, from that
very cause, be extremely weak, when no father can say, this is my son;
or son, this is my father; for as a very little of what is sweet, being
mixed with a great deal of water is imperceptible after the mixture, so
must all family connections, and the names they go by, be necessarily
disregarded in such a community, it being then by no means necessary
that the father should have any regard for him he called a son, or
the brothers for those they call brothers. There are two things which
principally inspire mankind with care and love of their offspring,
knowing it is their own, and what ought to be the object of their
affection, neither of which can take place in this sort of community. As
for exchanging the children of the artificers and husbandmen with those
of the military, and theirs reciprocally with these, it will occasion
great confusion in whatever manner it shall be done; for of necessity,
those who carry the children must know from whom they took and to whom
they gave them; and by this means those evils which I have already
mentioned will necessarily be the more likely to happen, as blows,
incestuous love, murders, and the like; for those who are given from
their own parents to other citizens, the military, for instance, will
not call them brothers, sons, fathers, or mothers. The same thing
would happen to those of the military who were placed among the other
citizens; so that by this means every one would be in fear how to act
in consequence of consanguinity. And thus let us determine concerning a
community of wives and children.




CHAPTER V


We proceed next to consider in what manner property should be regulated
in a state which is formed after the most perfect mode of government,
whether it should be common or not; for this may be considered as a
separate question from what had been determined concerning [1263a] wives
and children; I mean, whether it is better that these should be held
separate, as they now everywhere are, or that not only possessions but
also the usufruct of them should be in common; or that the soil should
have a particular owner, but that the produce should be brought together
and used as one common stock, as some nations at present do; or on the
contrary, should the soil be common, and should it also be cultivated in
common, while the produce is divided amongst the individuals for their
particular use, which is said to be practised by some barbarians; or
shall both the soil and the fruit be common? When the business of
the husbandman devolves not on the citizen, the matter is much easier
settled; but when those labour together who have a common right of
possession, this may occasion several difficulties; for there may not
be an equal proportion between their labour and what they consume; and
those who labour hard and have but a small proportion of the produce,
will certainly complain of those who take a large share of it and do but
little for that. Upon the whole, as a community between man and man so
entire as to include everything possible, and thus to have all things
that man can possess in common, is very difficult, so is it particularly
so with respect to property; and this is evident from that community
which takes place between those who go out to settle a colony; for they
frequently have disputes with each other upon the most common occasions,
and come to blows upon trifles: we find, too, that we oftenest correct
those slaves who are generally employed in the common offices of the
family: a community of property then has these and other inconveniences
attending it.

But the manner of life which is now established, more particularly when
embellished with good morals and a system of equal laws, is far superior
to it, for it will have the advantage of both; by both I mean properties
being common, and divided also; for in some respects it ought to be in
a manner common, but upon the whole private: for every man's attention
being employed on his own particular concerns, will prevent mutual
complaints against each other; nay, by this means industry will be
increased, as each person will labour to improve his own private
property; and it will then be, that from a principle of virtue they will
mutually perform good offices to each other, according to the proverb,
"All things are common amongst friends;" and in some cities there are
traces of this custom to be seen, so that it is not impracticable, and
particularly in those which are best governed; some things are by this
means in a manner common, and others might be so; for there, every
person enjoying his own private property, some things he assists his
friend with, others are considered as in common; as in Lacedaemon, where
they use each other's slaves, as if they were, so to speak, their own,
as they do their horses and dogs, or even any provision they may want in
a journey.

It is evident then that it is best to have property private, but to make
the use of it common; but how the citizens are to be brought to it is
the particular [1263b] business of the legislator. And also with respect
to pleasure, it is unspeakable how advantageous it is, that a man should
think he has something which he may call his own; for it is by no means
to no purpose, that each person should have an affection for himself,
for that is natural, and yet to be a self-lover is justly censured; for
we mean by that, not one that simply loves himself, but one that loves
himself more than he ought; in like manner we blame a money-lover,
and yet both money and self is what all men love. Besides, it is very
pleasing to us to oblige and assist our friends and companions, as well
as those whom we are connected with by the rights of hospitality; and
this cannot be done without the establishment of private property, which
cannot take place with those who make a city too much one; besides, they
prevent every opportunity of exercising two principal virtues, modesty
and liberality. Modesty with respect to the female sex, for this virtue
requires you to abstain from her who is another's; liberality, which
depends upon private property, for without that no one can appear
liberal, or do any generous action; for liberality consists in imparting
to others what is our own.

This system of polity does indeed recommend itself by its good
appearance and specious pretences to humanity; and when first proposed
to any one, must give him great pleasure, as he will conclude it to be
a wonderful bond of friendship, connecting all to all; particularly
when any one censures the evils which are now to be found in society,
as arising from properties not being common, I mean the disputes which
happen between man and man, upon their different contracts with each
other; those judgments which are passed in court in consequence of
fraud, and perjury, and flattering the rich, none of which arise from
properties being private, but from the vices of mankind. Besides,
those who live in one general community, and have all things in common,
oftener dispute with each other than those who have their property
separate; from the very small number indeed of those who have their
property in common, compared with those where it is appropriated,
the instances of their quarrels are but few. It is also but right to
mention, not only the inconveniences they are preserved from who live in
a communion of goods, but also the advantages they are deprived of; for
when the whole comes to be considered, this manner of life will be found
impracticable.

We must suppose, then, that Socrates's mistake arose from the principle
he set out with being false; we admit, indeed, that both a family and a
city ought to be one in some particulars, but not entirely; for there
is a point beyond which if a city proceeds in reducing itself to one, it
will be no longer a city.

There is also another point at which it will still continue to be a
city, but it will approach so near to not being one, that it will be
worse than none; as if any one should reduce the voices of those who
sing in concert to one, or a verse to a foot. But the people ought to
be made one, and a community, as I have already said, by education;
as property at Lacedaemon, and their public tables at Crete, were made
common by their legislators. But yet, whosoever shall introduce any
education, and think thereby to make his city excellent and respectable,
will be absurd, while he expects to form it by such regulations, and not
by manners, philosophy, and laws. And whoever [1264a] would establish
a government upon a community of goods, ought to know that he should
consult the experience of many years, which would plainly enough inform
him whether such a scheme is useful; for almost all things have already
been found out, but some have been neglected, and others which have been
known have not been put in practice. But this would be most evident, if
any one could see such a government really established: for it would be
impossible to frame such a city without dividing and separating it into
its distinct parts, as public tables, wards, and tribes; so that here
the laws will do nothing more than forbid the military to engage
in agriculture, which is what the Lacedaemonians are at present
endeavouring to do.

Nor has Socrates told us (nor is it easy to say) what plan of government
should be pursued with respect to the individuals in the state where
there is a community of goods established; for though the majority
of his citizens will in general consist of a multitude of persons of
different occupations, of those he has determined nothing; whether the
property of the husbandman ought to be in common, or whether each person
should have his share to himself; and also, whether their wives and
children ought to be in common: for if all things are to be alike common
to all, where will be the difference between them and the military, or
what would they get by submitting to their government? and upon what
principles would they do it, unless they should establish the wise
practice of the Cretans? for they, allowing everything else to their
slaves, forbid them only gymnastic exercises and the use of arms. And if
they are not, but these should be in the same situation with respect to
their property which they are in other cities, what sort of a community
will there be? in one city there must of necessity be two, and those
contrary to each other; for he makes the military the guardians of the
state, and the husbandman, artisans, and others, citizens; and all those
quarrels, accusations, and things of the like sort, which he says are
the bane of other cities, will be found in his also: notwithstanding
Socrates says they will not want many laws in consequence of their
education, but such only as may be necessary for regulating the streets,
the markets, and the like, while at the same time it is the education of
the military only that he has taken any care of. Besides, he makes the
husbandmen masters of property upon paying a tribute; but this would
be likely to make them far more troublesome and high-spirited than the
Helots, the Penestise, or the slaves which others employ; nor has he
ever determined whether it is necessary to give any attention to them
in these particulars, nor thought of what is connected therewith,
their polity, their education, their laws; besides, it is of no little
consequence, nor is it easy to determine, how these should be framed so
as to preserve the community of the military.

Besides, if he makes the wives common, while the property [1264b]
continues separate, who shall manage the domestic concerns with the same
care which the man bestows upon his fields? nor will the inconvenience
be remedied by making property as well as wives common; and it is absurd
to draw a comparison from the brute creation, and say, that the same
principle should regulate the connection of a man and a woman which
regulates theirs amongst whom there is no family association.

It is also very hazardous to settle the magistracy as Socrates has
done; for he would have persons of the same rank always in office, which
becomes the cause of sedition even amongst those who are of no account,
but more particularly amongst those who are of a courageous and warlike
disposition; it is indeed evidently necessary that he should frame his
community in this manner; for that golden particle which God has mixed
up in the soul of man flies not from one to the other, but always
continues with the same; for he says, that some of our species have
gold, and others silver, blended in their composition from the moment of
their birth: but those who are to be husbandmen and artists, brass and
iron; besides, though he deprives the military of happiness, he says,
that the legislator ought to make all the citizens happy; but it
is impossible that the whole city can be happy, without all, or the
greater, or some part of it be happy. For happiness is not like
that numerical equality which arises from certain numbers when added
together, although neither of them may separately contain it; for
happiness cannot be thus added together, but must exist in every
individual, as some properties belong to every integral; and if the
military are not happy, who else are so? for the artisans are not, nor
the multitude of those who are employed in inferior offices. The state
which Socrates has described has all these defects, and others which are
not of less consequence.




CHAPTER VI


It is also nearly the same in the treatise upon Laws which was writ
afterwards, for which reason it will be proper in this place to consider
briefly what he has there said upon government, for Socrates has
thoroughly settled but very few parts of it; as for instance, in what
manner the community of wives and children ought to be regulated, how
property should be established, and government conducted.

Now he divides the inhabitants into two parts, husbandmen and soldiers,
and from these he select a third part who are to be senators and govern
the city; but he has not said whether or no the husbandman and artificer
shall have any or what share in the government, or whether they shall
have arms, and join with the others in war, or not. He thinks also
that the women ought to go to war, and have the same education as the
soldiers; as to other particulars, he has filled his treatise with
matter foreign to the purpose; and with respect to education, he has
only said what that of the guards ought to be.

[1265a] As to his book of Laws, laws are the principal thing which that
contains, for he has there said but little concerning government; and
this government, which he was so desirous of framing in such a manner as
to impart to its members a more entire community of goods than is to be
found in other cities, he almost brings round again to be the same
as that other government which he had first proposed; for except the
community of wives and goods, he has framed both his governments alike,
for the education of the citizens is to be the same in both; they are in
both to live without any servile employ, and their common tables are to
be the same, excepting that in that he says the women should have common
tables, and that there should be a thousand men-at-arms, in this, that
there should be five thousand.

All the discourses of Socrates are masterly, noble, new, and
inquisitive; but that they are all true it may probably be too much
to say. For now with respect to the number just spoken of, it must be
acknowledged that he would want the country of Babylonia for them, or
some one like it, of an immeasurable extent, to support five thousand
idle persons, besides a much greater number of women and servants. Every
one, it is true, may frame an hypothesis as he pleases, but yet it ought
to be possible. It has been said, that a legislator should have two
things in view when he frames his laws, the country and the people. He
will also do well, if he has some regard to the neighbouring states, if
he intends that his community should maintain any political intercourse
with them, for it is not only necessary that they should understand that
practice of war which is adapted to their own country, but to others
also; for admitting that any one chooses not this life either in
public or private, yet there is not the less occasion for their being
formidable to their enemies, not only when they invade their country,
but also when they retire out of it.

It may also be considered whether the quantity of each person's property
may not be settled in a different manner from what he has done it in,
by making it more determinate; for he says, that every one ought to have
enough whereon to live moderately, as if any one had said to live well,
which is the most comprehensive expression. Besides, a man may live
moderately and miserably at the same time; he had therefore better
have proposed, that they should live both moderately and liberally;
for unless these two conspire, luxury will come in on the one hand, or
wretchedness on the other, since these two modes of living are the only
ones applicable to the employment of our substance; for we cannot say
with respect to a man's fortune, that he is mild or courageous, but we
may say that he is prudent and liberal, which are the only qualities
connected therewith.

It is also absurd to render property equal, and not to provide for
the increasing number of the citizens; but to leave that circumstance
uncertain, as if it would regulate itself according to the number of
women who [1265b] should happen to be childless, let that be what it
would because this seems to take place in other cities; but the case
would not be the same in such a state which he proposes and those which
now actually unite; for in these no one actually wants, as the property
is divided amongst the whole community, be their numbers what they will;
but as it could not then be divided, the supernumeraries, whether they
were many or few, would have nothing at all. But it is more necessary
than even to regulate property, to take care that the increase of the
people should not exceed a certain number; and in determining that,
to take into consideration those children who will die, and also those
women who will be barren; and to neglect this, as is done in several
cities, is to bring certain poverty on the citizens; and poverty is the
cause of sedition and evil. Now Phidon the Corinthian, one of the oldest
legislators, thought the families and the number of the citizens should
continue the same; although it should happen that all should have
allotments at the first, disproportionate to their numbers.

In Plato's Laws it is however different; we shall mention hereafter what
we think would be best in these particulars. He has also neglected in
that treatise to point out how the governors are to be distinguished
from the governed; for he says, that as of one sort of wool the warp
ought to be made, and of another the woof, so ought some to govern, and
others to be governed. But since he admits, that all their property may
be increased fivefold, why should he not allow the same increase to the
country? he ought also to consider whether his allotment of the houses
will be useful to the community, for he appoints two houses to each
person, separate from each other; but it is inconvenient for a person
to inhabit two houses. Now he is desirous to have his whole plan of
government neither a democracy nor an oligarchy, but something between
both, which he calls a polity, for it is to be composed of men-at-arms.
If Plato intended to frame a state in which more than in any other
everything should be common, he has certainly given it a right name;
but if he intended it to be the next in perfection to that which he had
already framed, it is not so; for perhaps some persons will give the
preference to the Lacedaemonian form of government, or some other which
may more completely have attained to the aristocratic form.

Some persons say, that the most perfect government should be composed
of all others blended together, for which reason they commend that
of Lacedaemon; for they say, that this is composed of an oligarchy,
a monarchy, and a democracy, their kings representing the monarchical
part, the senate the oligarchical; and, that in the ephori may be found
the democratical, as these are taken from the people. But some say, that
in the ephori is absolute power, and that it is their common meal and
daily course of life, in which the democratical form is represented.
It is also said in this treatise of [1266a] Laws, that the best form of
government must, be one composed of a democracy and a tyranny; though
such a mixture no one else would ever allow to be any government at all,
or if it is, the worst possible; those propose what is much better who
blend many governments together; for the most perfect is that which is
formed of many parts. But now in this government of Plato's there are
no traces of a monarchy, only of an oligarchy and democracy; though he
seems to choose that it should rather incline to an oligarchy, as is
evident from the appointment of the magistrates; for to choose them by
lot is common to both; but that a man of fortune must necessarily be a
member of the assembly, or to elect the magistrates, or take part in the
management of public affairs, while others are passed over, makes the
state incline to an oligarchy; as does the endeavouring that the
greater part of the rich may be in office, and that the rank of their
appointments may correspond with their fortunes.

The same principle prevails also in the choice of their senate; the
manner of electing which is favourable also to an oligarchy; for all
are obliged to vote for those who are senators of the first class,
afterwards they vote for the same number out of the second, and then out
of the third; but this compulsion to vote at the election of senators
does not extend to the third and fourth classes and the first and second
class only are obliged to vote for the fourth. By this means he says
he shall necessarily have an equal number of each rank, but he is
mistaken--for the majority will always consist of those of the first
rank, and the most considerable people; and for this reason, that
many of the commonalty not being obliged to it, will not attend the
elections. From hence it is evident, that such a state will not consist
of a democracy and a monarchy, and this will be further proved by
what we shall say when we come particularly to consider this form of
government.

There will also great danger arise from the manner of electing the
senate, when those who are elected themselves are afterwards to elect
others; for by this means, if a certain number choose to combine
together, though not very considerable, the election will always fall
according to their pleasure. Such are the things which Plato proposes
concerning government in his book of Laws.




CHAPTER VII


There are also some other forms of government, which have been proposed
either by private persons, or philosophers, or politicians, all of which
come much nearer to those which have been really established, or now
exist, than these two of Plato's; for neither have they introduced the
innovation of a community of wives and children, and public tables for
the women, but have been contented to set out with establishing such
rules as are absolutely necessary.

There are some persons who think, that the first object of government
should be to regulate well everything relating to private property;
for they say, that a neglect herein is the source of all seditions
whatsoever. For this reason, Phaleas the Chalcedonian first proposed,
that the fortunes of the citizens should be equal, which he thought was
not difficult to accomplish when a community was first settled, but
that it was a work of greater difficulty in one that had been long
established; but yet that it might be effected, and an equality of
circumstances introduced by these means, that the rich should give
marriage portions, but never receive any, while the poor should always
receive, but never give.

But Plato, in his treatise of Laws, thinks that a difference in
circumstances should be permitted to a certain degree; but that no
citizen should be allowed to possess more than five times as much as the
lowest census, as we have already mentioned. But legislators who
would establish this principle are apt to overlook what they ought to
consider; that while they regulate the quantity of provisions which each
individual shall possess, they ought also to regulate the number of his
children; for if these exceed the allotted quantity of provision, the
law must necessarily be repealed; and yet, in spite of the repeal, it
will have the bad effect of reducing many from wealth to poverty, so
difficult is it for innovators not to fall into such mistakes. That an
equality of goods was in some degree serviceable to strengthen the bands
of society, seems to have been known to some of the ancients; for Solon
made a law, as did some others also, to restrain persons from possessing
as much land as they pleased. And upon the same principle there are laws
which forbid men to sell their property, as among the Locrians, unless
they can prove that some notorious misfortune has befallen them. They
were also to preserve their ancient patrimony, which custom being broken
through by the Leucadians, made their government too democratic; for
by that means it was no longer necessary to be possessed of a certain
fortune to be qualified to be a magistrate. But if an equality of goods
is established, this may be either too much, when it enables the people
to live luxuriously, or too little, when it obliges them to live
hard. Hence it is evident, that it is not proper for the legislator
to establish an equality of circumstances, but to fix a proper medium.
Besides, if any one should regulate the division of property in such a
manner that there should be a moderate sufficiency for all, it would
be of no use; for it is of more consequence that the citizen should
entertain a similarity of sentiments than an equality of circumstances;
but this can never be attained unless they are properly educated under
the direction of the law. But probably Phaleas may say, that this in
what he himself mentions; for he both proposes a equality of property
and one plan of education in his city. But he should have said
particularly what education he intended, nor is it of any service to
have this to much one; for this education may be one, and yet such as
will make the citizens over-greedy, to grasp after honours, or riches,
or both. Besides, not only an inequality of possessions, but also
of honours, will occasion [1267a] seditions, but this upon contrary
grounds; for the vulgar will be seditious if there be an inequality of
goods, by those of more elevated sentiments, if there is an equality of
honours.

  "When good and bad do equal honours share."

For men are not guilty of crimes for necessaries only (for which he
thinks an equality of goods would be a sufficient remedy, as they would
then have no occasion to steal cold or hunger), but that they may enjoy
what they desire, and not wish for it in vain; for if their desire extend
beyond the common necessaries of life, they were be wicked to gratify
them; and not only so, but if their wishes point that way, they will do
the same to enjoy those pleasures which are free from the alloy of pain.
What remedy then shall we find for these three disorders? And first,
to prevent stealing from necessity, let every one be supplied with a
moderate subsistence, which may make the addition of his own industry
necessary; second to prevent stealing to procure the luxuries of life,
temperance be enjoined; and thirdly, let those who wish for pleasure in
itself seek for it only in philosophy, all others want the assistance of
men.

Since then men are guilty of the greatest crimes from ambition, and not
from necessity, no one, for instance aims at being a tyrant to keep him
from the cold, hence great honour is due to him who kills not a thief,
but tyrant; so that polity which Phaleas establishes would only be
salutary to prevent little crimes. He has also been very desirous to
establish such rules as will conduce to perfect the internal policy of
his state, and he ought also to have done the same with respect to
its neighbours and all foreign nations; for the considerations of the
military establishment should take place in planning every government,
that it may not be unprovided in case of a war, of which he has said
nothing; so also with respect to property, it ought not only to be
adapted to the exigencies of the state, but also to such dangers as may
arise from without.

Thus it should not be so much as to tempt those who are near, and more
powerful to invade it, while those who possess it are not able to drive
out the invaders, nor so little as that the state should not be able to
go to war with those who are quite equal to itself, and of this he has
determined nothing; it must indeed be allowed that it is advantageous to
a community to be rather rich than poor; probably the proper boundary is
this, not to possess enough to make it worth while for a more powerful
neighbour to attack you, any more than he would those who had not so
much as yourself; thus when Autophradatus proposed to besiege Atarneus,
Eubulus advised him to consider what time it would require to take the
city, and then would have him determine whether it would answer, for
that he should choose, if it would even take less than he proposed,
to quit the place; his saying this made Autophradatus reflect upon the
business and give over the siege. There is, indeed, some advantage in an
equality of goods amongst the citizens to prevent seditions; and yet,
to say truth, no very great one; for men of great abilities will stomach
their being put upon a level with the rest of the community. For
which reason they will very often appear ready for every commotion and
sedition; for the wickedness of mankind is insatiable. For though
at first two oboli might be sufficient, yet when once it is become
customary, they continually want something more, until they set no
limits to their expectations; for it is the nature of our desires to be
boundless, and many live only to gratify them. But for this purpose the
first object is, not so much to establish an equality of fortune, as
to prevent those who are of a good disposition from desiring more than
their own, and those who are of a bad one from being able to acquire it;
and this may be done if they are kept in an inferior station, and not
exposed to injustice. Nor has he treated well the equality of goods, for
he has extended his regulation only to land; whereas a man's substance
consists not only in this, but also in slaves, cattle, money, and all
that variety of things which fall under the name of chattels; now there
must be either an equality established in all these, or some certain
rule, or they must be left entirely at large. It appears too by his
laws, that he intends to establish only a small state, as all the
artificers are to belong to the public, and add nothing to the
complement of citizens; but if all those who are to be employed in
public works are to be the slaves of the public, it should be done
in the same manner as it is at Epidamnum, and as Diophantus formerly
regulated it at Athens. From these particulars any one may nearly judge
whether Phaleas's community is well or ill established.




CHAPTER VIII


Hippodamus, the son of Euruphon a Milesian, contrived the art of laying
out towns, and separated the Pireus. This man was in other respects
too eager after notice, and seemed to many to live in a very affected
manner, with his flowing locks and his expensive ornaments, and a coarse
warm vest which he wore, not only in the winter, but also in the
hot weather. As he was very desirous of the character of a universal
scholar, he was the first who, not being actually engaged in the
management of public affairs, sat himself to inquire what sort of
government was best; and he planned a state, consisting of ten thousand
persons, divided into three parts, one consisting of artisans, another
of husbandmen, and the third of soldiers; he also divided the lands into
three parts, and allotted one to sacred purposes, another to the public,
and the third to individuals. The first of these was to supply what was
necessary for the established worship of the gods; the second was to
be allotted to the support of the soldiery; and the third was to be
the property of the husbandman. He thought also that there need only be
three sorts of laws, corresponding to the three sorts of actions which
can be brought, namely, for assault, trespasses, or death. He ordered
also that there should be a particular court of appeal, into which
all causes might be removed which were supposed to have been unjustly
determined elsewhere; which court should be composed of old men chosen
for that purpose. He thought also [1268a] that they should not pass
sentence by votes; but that every one should bring with him a tablet, on
which he should write, that he found the party guilty, if it was so, but
if not, he should bring a plain tablet; but if he acquitted him of one
part of the indictment but not of the other, he should express that
also on the tablet; for he disapproved of that general custom already
established, as it obliges the judges to be guilty of perjury if they
determined positively either on the one side or the other. He also made
a law, that those should be rewarded who found out anything for the good
of the city, and that the children of those who fell in battle should be
educated at the public expense; which law had never been proposed by any
other legislator, though it is at present in use at Athens as well as in
other cities, he would have the magistrates chosen out of the people
in general, by whom he meant the three parts before spoken of; and that
those who were so elected should be the particular guardians of what
belonged to the public, to strangers, and to orphans.

These are the principal parts and most worthy of notice in Hippodamus's
plan. But some persons might doubt the propriety of his division of the
citizens into three parts; for the artisans, the husbandmen, and the
soldiers are to compose one community, where the husbandmen are to have
no arms, and the artisans neither arms nor land, which would in a manner
render them slaves to the soldiery. It is also impossible that the whole
community should partake of all the honourable employments in it--for
the generals and the guardians of the state must necessarily be
appointed out of the soldiery, and indeed the most honourable
magistrates; but as the two other parts will not have their share in the
government, how can they be expected to have any affection for it? But
it is necessary that the soldiery should be superior to the other two
parts, and this superiority will not be easily gained without they are
very numerous; and if they are so, why should the community consist
of any other members? why should any others have a right to elect the
magistrates? Besides, of what use are the husbandmen to this community?
Artisans, 'tis true, are necessary, for these every city wants, and they
can live upon their business. If the husbandmen indeed furnished the
soldiers with provisions, they would be properly part of the community;
but these are supposed to have their private property, and to cultivate
it for their own use. Moreover, if the soldiers themselves are to
cultivate that common land which is appropriated for their support,
there will be no distinction between the soldier and the husbandman,
which the legislator intended there should be; and if there should be
any others who are to cultivate the private property of the husbandman
and the common lands of the military, there will be a fourth order in
the state which will have no share in it, and always entertain hostile
sentiments towards it. If any one should propose that the same persons
should cultivate their own lands and the public ones also, then there
would be a deficiency [1268b] of provisions to supply two families,
as the lands would not immediately yield enough for themselves and the
soldiers also; and all these things would occasion great confusion.

Nor do I approve of his method of determining causes, when he would
have the judge split the case which comes simply before him; and thus,
instead of being a judge, become an arbitrator. Now when any matter
is brought to arbitration, it is customary for many persons to confer
together upon the business that is before them; but when a cause is
brought before judges it is not so; and many legislators take care
that the judges shall not have it in their power to communicate their
sentiments to each other. Besides, what can prevent confusion on the
bench when one judge thinks a fine should be different from what another
has set it at; one proposing twenty minae, another ten, or be it more
or less, another four, and another five; and it is evident, that in this
manner they will differ from each other, while some will give the whole
damages sued for, and others nothing; in this situation, how shall their
determinations be settled? Besides, a judge cannot be obliged to perjure
himself who simply acquits or condemns, if the action is fairly and
justly brought; for he who acquits the party does not say that he ought
not to pay any fine at all, but that he ought not to pay a fine of
twenty minae. But he that condemns him is guilty of perjury if he
sentences him to pay twenty minae while he believes the damages ought
not to be so much.

Now with respect to these honours which he proposes to bestow on those
who can give any information useful to the community, this, though very
pleasing in speculation, is what the legislator should not settle, for
it would encourage informers, and probably occasion commotions in the
state. And this proposal of his gives rise also to further conjectures
and inquiries; for some persons have doubted whether it is useful or
hurtful to alter the established law of any country, if even for the
better; for which reason one cannot immediately determine upon what he
here says, whether it is advantageous to alter the law or not. We know,
indeed, that it is possible to propose to new model both the laws and
government as a common good; and since we have mentioned this subject,
it may be very proper to enter into a few particulars concerning it, for
it contains some difficulties, as I have already said, and it may appear
better to alter them, since it has been found useful in other sciences.

Thus the science of physic is extended beyond its ancient bounds; so is
the gymnastic, and indeed all other arts and powers; so that one may lay
it down for certain that the same thing will necessarily hold good in
the art of government. And it may also be affirmed, that experience
itself gives a proof of this; for the ancient laws are too simple and
barbarous; which allowed the Greeks to wear swords in the city, and to
buy their wives of each [1269a]. other. And indeed all the remains of
old laws which we have are very simple; for instance, a law in Cuma
relative to murder. If any person who prosecutes another for murder can
produce a certain number of witnesses to it of his own relations, the
accused person shall be held guilty. Upon the whole, all persons ought
to endeavour to follow what is right, and not what is established; and
it is probable that the first men, whether they sprung out of the earth,
or were saved from some general calamity, had very little understanding
or knowledge, as is affirmed of these aborigines; so that it would be
absurd to continue in the practice of their rules. Nor is it, moreover,
right to permit written laws always to remain without alteration; for
as in all other sciences, so in politics, it is impossible to express
everything in writing with perfect exactness; for when we commit
anything to writing we must use general terms, but in every action there
is something particular to itself, which these may not comprehend; from
whence it is evident, that certain laws will at certain times admit of
alterations. But if we consider this matter in another point of view, it
will appear to require great caution; for when the advantage proposed is
trifling, as the accustoming the people easily to abolish their laws
is of bad consequence, it is evidently better to pass over some faults
which either the legislator or the magistrates may have committed; for
the alterations will not be of so much service as a habit of disobeying
the magistrates will be of disservice. Besides, the instance brought
from the arts is fallacious; for it is not the same thing to alter the
one as the other. For a law derives all its strength from custom, and
this requires long time to establish; so that, to make it an easy matter
to pass from the established laws to other new ones, is to weaken the
power of laws. Besides, here is another question; if the laws are to be
altered, are they all to be altered, and in every government or not, and
whether at the pleasure of one person or many? all which particulars
will make a great difference; for which reason we will at present drop
the inquiry, to pursue it at some other time.




CHAPTER IX


There are two considerations which offer themselves with respect to the
government established at Lacedaemon and Crete, and indeed in almost all
other states whatsoever; one is whether their laws do or do not promote
the best establishment possible? the other is whether there is anything,
if we consider either the principles upon which it is founded or the
executive part of it, which prevents the form of government that they
had proposed to follow from being observed; now it is allowed that in
every well-regulated state the members of it should be free from servile
labour; but in what manner this shall be effected is not so easy to
determine; for the Penestse have very often attacked the Thessalians,
and the Helots the Lacedaemonians, for they in a manner continually
watch an opportunity for some misfortune befalling them. But no such
thing has ever happened to the Cretans; the [1269b] reason for which
probably is, that although they are engaged in frequent wars with the
neighbouring cities, yet none of these would enter into an alliance with
the revolters, as it would be disadvantageous for them, who themselves
also have their villains. But now there is perpetual enmity between the
Lacedaemonians and all their neighbours, the Argives, the Messenians,
and the Arcadians. Their slaves also first revolted from the Thessalians
while they were engaged in wars with their neighbours the Acheans, the
Perrabeans, and the Magnesians. It seems to me indeed, if nothing else,
yet something very troublesome to keep upon proper terms with them;
for if you are remiss in your discipline they grow insolent, and think
themselves upon an equality with their masters; and if they are hardly
used they are continually plotting against you and hate you. It is
evident, then, that those who employ slaves have not as yet hit upon the
right way of managing them.

As to the indulging of women in any particular liberties, it is hurtful
to the end of government and the prosperity of the city; for as a man
and his wife are the two parts of a family, if we suppose a city to be
divided into two parts, we must allow that the number of men and women
will be equal.

In whatever city then the women are not under good regulations, we must
look upon one half of it as not under the restraint of law, as it
there happened; for the legislator, desiring to make his whole city
a collection of warriors with respect to the men, he most evidently
accomplished his design; but in the meantime the women were quite
neglected, for they live without restraint in every improper indulgence
and luxury. So that in such a state riches will necessarily be in
general esteem, particularly if the men are governed by their wives,
which has been the case with many a brave and warlike people except
the Celts, and those other nations, if there are any such, who openly
practise pederasty. And the first mythologists seem not improperly to
have joined Mars and Venus together; for all nations of this character
are greatly addicted either to the love of women or of boys, for which
reason it was thus at Lacedaemon; and many things in their state were
done by the authority of the women. For what is the difference, if the
power is in the hands of the women, or in the hands of those whom they
themselves govern? it must turn to the same account. As this boldness of
the women can be of no use in any common occurrences, if it was ever so,
it must be in war; but even here we find that the Lacedaemonian women
were of the greatest disservice, as was proved at the time of the Theban
invasion, when they were of no use at all, as they are in other cities,
but made more disturbance than even the enemy.

The origin of this indulgence which the Lacedaemonian women enjoy is
easily accounted for, from the long time the men were absent from home
upon foreign expeditions [1270a] against the Argives, and afterwards the
Arcadians and Messenians, so that, when these wars were at an end, their
military life, in which there is no little virtue, prepared them to obey
the precepts of their law-giver; but we are told, that when Lycurgus
endeavoured also to reduce the women to an obedience to his laws, upon
their refusal he declined it. It may indeed be said that the women were
the causes of these things, and of course all the fault was theirs. But
we are not now considering where the fault lies, or where it does not
lie, but what is right and what is wrong; and when the manners of the
women are not well regulated, as I have already said, it must not only
occasion faults which are disgraceful to the state, but also increase
the love of money. In the next place, fault may be found with his
unequal division of property, for some will have far too much, others
too little; by which means the land will come into few hands, which
business is badly regulated by his laws. For he made it infamous for any
one either to buy or sell their possessions, in which he did right; but
he permitted any one that chose it to give them away, or bequeath them,
although nearly the same consequences will arise from one practice as
from the other. It is supposed that near two parts in five of the whole
country is the property of women, owing to their being so often sole
heirs, and having such large fortunes in marriage; though it would
be better to allow them none, or a little, or a certain regulated
proportion. Now every one is permitted to make a woman his heir if he
pleases; and if he dies intestate, he who succeeds as heir at law gives
it to whom he pleases. From whence it happens that although the country
is able to support fifteen hundred horse and thirty thousand foot, the
number does not amount to one thousand.

And from these facts it is evident, that this particular is badly
regulated; for the city could not support one shock, but was ruined for
want of men. They say, that during the reigns of their ancient kings
they used to present foreigners with the freedom of their city, to
prevent there being a want of men while they carried on long wars; it is
also affirmed that the number of Spartans was formerly ten thousand; but
be that as it will, an equality of property conduces much to increase
the number of the people. The law, too, which he made to encourage
population was by no means calculated to correct this inequality;
for being willing that the Spartans should be as numerous as [1270b]
possible, to make them desirous of having large families he ordered that
he who had three children should be excused the night-watch, and that he
who had four should pay no taxes: though it is very evident, that while
the land was divided in this manner, that if the people increased there
must many of them be very poor.

Nor was he less blamable for the manner in which he constituted the
ephori; for these magistrates take cognisance of things of the last
importance, and yet they are chosen out of the people in general; so
that it often happens that a very poor person is elected to that office,
who, from that circumstance, is easily bought. There have been many
instances of this formerly, as well as in the late affair at Andros. And
these men, being corrupted with money, went as far as they could to ruin
the city: and, because their power was too great and nearly tyrannical,
their kings were obliged to natter them, which contributed greatly to
hurt the state; so that it altered from an aristocracy to a democracy.
This magistracy is indeed the great support of the state; for the people
are easy, knowing that they are eligible to the first office in it;
so that, whether it took place by the intention of the legislator,
or whether it happened by chance, this is of great service to their
affairs; for it is necessary that every member of the state should
endeavour that each part of the government should be preserved, and
continue the same. And upon this principle their kings have always
acted, out of regard to their honour; the wise and good from their
attachment to the senate, a seat wherein they consider as the reward of
virtue; and the common people, that they may support the ephori, of whom
they consist. And it is proper that these magistrates should be chosen
out of the whole community, not as the custom is at present, which is
very ridiculous. The ephori are the supreme judges in causes of the last
consequence; but as it is quite accidental what sort of persons they may
be, it is not right that they should determine according to their own
opinion, but by a written law or established custom. Their way of life
also is not consistent with the manners of the city, for it is too
indulgent; whereas that of others is too severe; so that they cannot
support it, but are obliged privately to act contrary to law, that they
may enjoy some of the pleasures of sense. There are also great defects
in the institution of their senators. If indeed they were fitly trained
to the practice of every human virtue, every one would readily admit
that they would be useful to the government; but still it might be
debated whether they should be continued judges for life, to determine
points of the greatest moment, since the mind has its old age as well
as the body; but as they are so brought up, [1271a] that even the
legislator could not depend upon them as good men, their power must
be inconsistent with the safety of the state: for it is known that the
members of that body have been guilty both of bribery and partiality in
many public affairs; for which reason it had been much better if they
had been made answerable for their conduct, which they are not. But it
may be said the ephori seem to have a check upon all the magistrates.
They have indeed in this particular very great power; but I affirm that
they should not be entrusted with this control in the manner they are.
Moreover, the mode of choice which they make use of at the election of
their senators is very childish. Nor is it right for any one to solicit
for a place he is desirous of; for every person, whether he chooses it
or not, ought to execute any office he is fit for. But his intention was
evidently the same in this as in the other parts of his government.
For making his citizens ambitious after honours, with men of that
disposition he has filled his senate, since no others will solicit for
that office; and yet the principal part of those crimes which men are
deliberately guilty of arise from ambition and avarice.

We will inquire at another time whether the office of a king is useful
to the state: thus much is certain, that they should be chosen from a
consideration of their conduct and not as they are now. But that the
legislator himself did not expect to make all his citizens honourable
and completely virtuous is evident from this, that he distrusts them as
not being good men; for he sent those upon the same embassy that were at
variance with each other; and thought, that in the dispute of the kings
the safety of the state consisted. Neither were their common meals at
first well established: for these should rather have been provided at
the public expense, as at Crete, where, as at Lacedaemon, every one was
obliged to buy his portion, although he might be very poor, and could by
no means bear the expense, by which means the contrary happened to what
the legislator desired: for he intended that those public meals should
strengthen the democratic part of his government: but this regulation
had quite the contrary effect, for those who were very poor could not
take part in them; and it was an observation of their forefathers, that
the not allowing those who could not contribute their proportion to the
common tables to partake of them, would be the ruin of the state. Other
persons have censured his laws concerning naval affairs, and not without
reason, as it gave rise to disputes. For the commander of the fleet is
in a manner set up in opposition to the kings, who are generals of the
army for life.

[1271b] There is also another defect in his laws worthy of censure,
which Plato has given in his book of Laws; that the whole constitution
was calculated only for the business of war: it is indeed excellent to
make them conquerors; for which reason the preservation of the state
depended thereon. The destruction of it commenced with their victories:
for they knew not how to be idle, or engage in any other employment
than war. In this particular also they were mistaken, that though they
rightly thought, that those things which are the objects of contention
amongst mankind are better procured by virtue than vice, yet they
wrongfully preferred the things themselves to virtue. Nor was the public
revenue well managed at Sparta, for the state was worth nothing while
they were obliged to carry on the most extensive wars, and the subsidies
were very badly raised; for as the Spartans possessed a large extent of
country, they were not exact upon each other as to what they paid in.
And thus an event contrary to the legislator's intention took place;
for the state was poor, the individuals avaricious. Enough of the
Lacedaemonian government; for these seem the chief defects in it.




CHAPTER X


The government of Crete bears a near resemblance to this, in some few
particulars it is not worse, but in general it is far inferior in its
contrivance. For it appears and is allowed in many particulars the
constitution of Lacedaemon was formed in imitation of that of Crete;
and in general most new things are an improvement upon the old. For they
say, that when Lycurgus ceased to be guardian to King Charilles he
went abroad and spent a long time with his relations in Crete, for the
Lycians are a colony of the Lacedaemonians; and those who first settled
there adopted that body of laws which they found already established by
the inhabitants; in like manner also those who now live near them have
the very laws which Minos first drew up.

This island seems formed by nature to be the mistress of Greece, for it
is entirely surrounded by a navigable ocean which washes almost all the
maritime parts of that country, and is not far distant on the one side
from Peloponnesus, on the other, which looks towards Asia, from Triopium
and Rhodes. By means of this situation Minos acquired the empire of
the sea and the islands; some of which he subdued, in others planted
colonies: at last he died at Camicus while he was attacking Sicily.
There is this analogy between the customs of the Lacedaemonians and
the Cretans, the Helots cultivate the grounds [1272a] for the one, the
domestic slaves for the other. Both states have their common meals, and
the Lacedaemonians called these formerly not _psiditia_ but _andpia_,
as the Cretans do; which proves from whence the custom arose. In this
particular their governments are also alike: the ephori have the same
power with those of Crete, who are called _kosmoi_; with this difference
only, that the number of the one is five, of the other ten. The senators
are the same as those whom the Cretans call the council. There was
formerly also a kingly power in Crete; but it was afterwards dissolved,
and the command of their armies was given to the _kosmoi_. Every one
also has a vote in their public assembly; but this has only the power of
confirming what has already passed the council and the _kosmoi_.

The Cretans conducted their public meals better than the Lacedaemonians,
for at Lacedaemon each individual was obliged to furnish what was
assessed upon him; which if he could not do, there was a law which
deprived him of the rights of a citizen, as has been already mentioned:
but in Crete they were furnished by the community; for all the corn and
cattle, taxes and contributions, which the domestic slaves were obliged
to furnish, were divided into parts and allotted to the gods, the
exigencies of the state, and these public meals; so that all the men,
women, and children were maintained from a common stock. The legislator
gave great attention to encourage a habit of eating sparingly, as very
useful to the citizens. He also endeavoured, that his community might
not be too populous, to lessen the connection with women, by introducing
the love of boys: whether in this he did well or ill we shall have some
other opportunity of considering. But that the public meals were better
ordered at Crete than at Lacedaemon is very evident.

The institution of the _kosmoi_, was still worse than that of the
ephori: for it contained all the faults incident to that magistracy and
some peculiar to itself; for in both cases it is uncertain who will be
elected: but the Lacedaemonians have this advantage which the others
have not, that as all are eligible, the whole community have a share
in the highest honours, and therefore all desire to preserve the state:
whereas among the Cretans the _kosmoi_ are not chosen out of the people
in general, but out of some certain families, and the senate out of the
_kosmoi_. And the same observations which may be made on the senate at
Lacedaemon may be applied to these; for their being under no control,
and their continuing for life, is an honour greater than they merit; and
to have their proceedings not regulated by a written law, but left to
their own discretion, is dangerous. (As to there being no insurrections,
although the people share not in the management of public affairs, this
is no proof of a well-constituted government, as the _kosmoi_ have no
opportunity of being bribed like the ephori, as they live in an [1272b]
island far from those who would corrupt them.) But the method they take
to correct that fault is absurd, impolitic, and tyrannical: for very
often either their fellow-magistrates or some private persons conspire
together and turn out the _kosmoi_. They are also permitted to resign
their office before their time is elapsed, and if all this was done by
law it would be well, and not at the pleasure of the individuals, which
is a bad rule to follow. But what is worst of all is, that general
confusion which those who are in power introduce to impede the ordinary
course of justice; which sufficiently shows what is the nature of the
government, or rather lawless force: for it is usual with the principal
persons amongst them to collect together some of the common people and
their friends, and then revolt and set up for themselves, and come
to blows with each other. And what is the difference, if a state is
dissolved at once by such violent means, or if it gradually so alters in
process of time as to be no longer the same constitution? A state like
this would ever be exposed to the invasions of those who were powerful
and inclined to attack it; but, as has been already mentioned, its
situation preserves it, as it is free from the inroads of foreigners;
and for this reason the family slaves still remain quiet at Crete, while
the Helots are perpetually revolting: for the Cretans take no part in
foreign affairs, and it is but lately that any foreign troops have
made an attack upon the island; and their ravages soon proved the
ineffectualness of their laws. And thus much for the government of
Crete.




CHAPTER XI


The government of Carthage seems well established, and in many respects
superior to others; in some particulars it bears a near resemblance
to the Lacedaemonians; and indeed these three states, the Cretans, the
Lacedaemonians and the Carthaginians are in some things very like
each other, in others they differ greatly. Amongst many excellent
constitutions this may show how well their government is framed, that
although the people are admitted to a share in the administration, the
form of it remains unaltered, without any popular insurrections, worth
notice, on the one hand, or degenerating into a tyranny on the
other. Now the Carthaginians have these things in common with the
Lacedaemonians: public tables for those who are connected together by
the tie of mutual friendship, after the manner of their Phiditia; they
have also a magistracy, consisting of an hundred and four persons,
similar to the ephori, or rather selected with more judgment; for
amongst the Lacedaemonians, all the citizens are eligible, but amongst
the Carthaginians, they are chosen out of those of the better sort:
there is also some analogy between the king and the senate in both these
governments, though the Carthaginian method of appointing their kings
is best, for they do not confine themselves to one family; nor do
they permit the election to be at large, nor have they any regard to
seniority; for if amongst the candidates there are any of greater merit
than the rest, these they prefer to those who may be older; for as their
power is very extensive, if they are [1273a] persons of no account,
they may be very hurtful to the state, as they have always been to
the Lacedaemonians; also the greater part of those things which become
reprehensible by their excess are common to all those governments which
we have described.

Now of those principles on which the Carthaginians have established
their mixed form of government, composed of an aristocracy and
democracy, some incline to produce a democracy, others an oligarchy: for
instance, if the kings and the senate are unanimous upon any point in
debate, they can choose whether they will bring it before the people or
no; but if they disagree, it is to these they must appeal, who are not
only to hear what has been approved of by the senate, but are finally
to determine upon it; and whosoever chooses it, has a right to speak
against any matter whatsoever that may be proposed, which is not
permitted in other cases. The five, who elect each other, have very
great and extensive powers; and these choose the hundred, who are
magistrates of the highest rank: their power also continues longer than
any other magistrates, for it commences before they come into office,
and is prolonged after they are out of it; and in this particular the
state inclines to an oligarchy: but as they are not elected by lot, but
by suffrage, and are not permitted to take money, they are the greatest
supporters imaginable of an aristocracy.

The determining all causes by the same magistrates, and not orae in one
court and another in another, as at Lacedaemon, has the same influence.
The constitution of Carthage is now shifting from an aristocracy to an
oligarchy, in consequence of an opinion which is favourably entertained
by many, who think that the magistrates in the community ought not to
be persons of family only, but of fortune also; as it is impossible
for those who are in bad circumstances to support the dignity of their
office, or to be at leisure to apply to public business. As choosing men
of fortune to be magistrates make a state incline to an oligarchy,
and men of abilities to an aristocracy, so is there a third method of
proceeding which took place in the polity of Carthage; for they have
an eye to these two particulars when they elect their officers,
particularly those of the highest rank, their kings and their generals.
It must be admitted, that it was a great fault in their legislator not
to guard against the constitution's degenerating from an aristocracy;
for this is a most necessary thing to provide for at first, that those
citizens who have the best abilities should never be obliged to do
anything unworthy their character, but be always at leisure to serve the
public, not only when in office, but also when private persons; for if
once you are obliged to look among the wealthy, that you may have men at
leisure to serve you, your greatest offices, of king and general,
will soon become venal; in consequence of which, riches will be more
honourable than virtue and a love of money be the ruling principle in
the city-for what those who have the chief power regard as honourable
will necessarily be the object which the [1273b] citizens in general
will aim at; and where the first honours are not paid to virtue,
there the aristocratic form of government cannot flourish: for it
is reasonable to conclude, that those who bought their places should
generally make an advantage of what they laid out their money for; as
it is absurd to suppose, that if a man of probity who is poor should be
desirous of gaining something, a bad man should not endeavour to do the
same, especially to reimburse himself; for which reason the magistracy
should be formed of those who are most able to support an aristocracy.
It would have been better for the legislature to have passed over the
poverty of men of merit, and only to have taken care to have ensured
them sufficient leisure, when in office, to attend to public affairs.

It seems also improper, that one person should execute several offices,
which was approved of at Carthage; for one business is best done by one
person; and it is the duty of the legislator to look to this, and not
make the same person a musician and a shoemaker: so that where the state
is not small it is more politic and more popular to admit many persons
to have a share in the government; for, as I just now said, it is not
only more usual, but everything is better and sooner done, when one
thing only is allotted to one person: and this is evident both in the
army and navy, where almost every one, in his turn, both commands and
is under command. But as their government inclines to an oligarchy, they
avoid the ill effects of it by always appointing some of the popular
party to the government of cities to make their fortunes. Thus they
consult this fault in their constitution and render it stable; but
this is depending on chance; whereas the legislator ought to frame his
government, that there the no room for insurrections. But now, if there
should be any general calamity, and the people should revolt from their
rulers, there is no remedy for reducing them to obedience by the laws.
And these are the particulars of the Lacedaemonian, the Cretan, and the
Carthaginian governments which seem worthy of commendation.




CHAPTER XII


Some of those persons who have written upon government had never any
share in public affairs, but always led a private life. Everything
worthy of notice in their works we have already spoke to. Others
were legislators, some in their own cities, others were employed in
regulating the governments of foreign states. Some of them only composed
a body of laws; others formed the constitution also, as Lycurgus; and
Solon, who did both. The Lacedaemonians have been already mentioned.
Some persons think that Solon was an excellent legislator, who could
dissolve a pure oligarchy, and save the people from that slavery which
hung over them, and establish the ancient democratic form of government
in his country; wherein every part of it was so framed as to be well
adapted to the whole. In the senate of Areopagus an oligarchy was
preserved; by the manner of electing their [1274a] magistrates, an
aristocracy; and in their courts of justice, a democracy.

Solon seems not to have altered the established form of government,
either with respect to the senate or the mode of electing their
magistrates; but to have raised the people to great consideration in the
state by allotting the supreme judicial department to them; and for this
some persons blame him, as having done what would soon overturn that
balance of power he intended to establish; for by trying all causes
whatsoever before the people, who were chosen by lot to determine them,
it was necessary to flatter a tyrannical populace who had got this
power; which contributed to bring the government to that pure democracy
it now is.

Both Ephialtes and Pericles abridged the power of the Areopagites, the
latter of whom introduced the method of paying those who attended
the courts of justice: and thus every one who aimed at being popular
proceeded increasing the power of the people to what we now see it. But
it is evident that this was not Solon's intention, but that it arose
from accident; for the people being the cause of the naval victory
over the Medes, assumed greatly upon it, and enlisted themselves
under factious demagogues, although opposed by the better part of the
citizens. He thought it indeed most necessary to entrust the people
with the choice of their magistrates and the power of calling them to
account; for without that they must have been slaves and enemies to the
other citizens: but he ordered them to elect those only who were persons
of good account and property, either out of those who were worth five
hundred medimns, or those who were called xeugitai, or those of the
third census, who were called horsemen.

As for those of the fourth, which consisted of mechanics, they were
incapable of any office. Zaleucus was the legislator of the Western
Locrians, as was Charondas, the Catanean, of his own cities, and those
also in Italy and Sicily which belonged to the Calcidians. Some persons
endeavour to prove that Onomacritus, the Locrian, was the first person
of note who drew up laws; and that he employed himself in that business
while he was at Crete, where he continued some time to learn the
prophetic art: and they say, that Thales was his companion; and that
Lycurgus and Zaleucus were the scholars of Thales, and Charondas of
Zaleucus; but those who advance this, advance what is repugnant to
chronology. Philolaus also, of the family of the Bacchiades, was a
Theban legislator. This man was very fond of Diocles, a victor in
the Olympic games, and when he left his country from a disgust at an
improper passion which his mother Alithoe had entertained for him, and
settled at Thebes, Philolaus followed him, where they both died, and
where they still show their tombs placed in view of each other, but so
disposed, that one of them looks towards Corinth, the other does not;
the reason they give for this is, that Diodes, from his detestation of
his mother's passion, would have his tomb so placed that no one could
see Corinth from it; but Philolaus chose that it might be seen from his:
and this was the cause of their living at Thebes. [1274b]

As Philolaus gave them laws concerning many other things, so did he upon
adoption, which they call adoptive laws; and this he in particular did
to preserve the number of families. Charondas did nothing new, except
in actions for perjury, which he was the first person who took into
particular consideration. He also drew up his laws with greater elegance
and accuracy than even any of our present legislators. Philolaus
introduced the law for the equal distribution of goods; Plato that for
the community of women, children, and goods, and also for public tables
for the women; and one concerning drunkenness, that they might observe
sobriety in their symposiums. He also made a law concerning their
warlike exercises; that they should acquire a habit of using both hands
alike, as it was necessary that one hand should be as useful as the
other.

As for Draco's laws, they were published when the government was already
established, and they have nothing particular in them worth mentioning,
except their severity on account of the enormity of their punishments.
Pittacus was the author of some laws, but never drew up any form of
government; one of which was this, that if a drunken man beat any person
he should be punished more than if he did it when sober; for as
people are more apt to be abusive when drunk than sober, he paid no
consideration to the excuse which drunkenness might claim, but regarded
only the common benefit. Andromadas Regmus was also a lawgiver to the
Thracian talcidians. There are some laws of his concerning murders and
heiresses extant, but these contain nothing that any one can say is new
and his own. And thus much for different sorts of governments, as well
those which really exist as those which different persons have proposed.




BOOK III




CHAPTER I


Every one who inquires into the nature of government, and what are its
different forms, should make this almost his first question, What is a
city? For upon this there is a dispute: for some persons say the city
did this or that, while others say, not the city, but the oligarchy,
or the tyranny. We see that the city is the only object which both the
politician and legislator have in view in all they do: but government
is a certain ordering of those who inhabit a city. As a city is a
collective body, and, like other wholes, composed of many parts, it is
evident our first inquiry must be, what a citizen is: for a city is a
certain number of citizens. So that we must consider whom we ought to
call citizen, and who is one; for this is often doubtful: for every one
will not allow that this character is applicable to the same person; for
that man who would be a citizen in a republic would very often not be
one in an oligarchy. We do not include in this inquiry many of those who
acquire this appellation out of the ordinary way, as honorary persons,
for instance, but those only who have a natural right to it.

Now it is not residence which constitutes a man a citizen; for in this
sojourners and slaves are upon an equality with him; nor will it be
sufficient for this purpose, that you have the privilege of the laws,
and may plead or be impleaded, for this all those of different nations,
between whom there is a mutual agreement for that purpose, are allowed;
although it very often happens, that sojourners have not a perfect right
therein without the protection of a patron, to whom they are obliged to
apply, which shows that their share in the community is incomplete. In
like manner, with respect to boys who are not yet enrolled, or old men
who are past war, we admit that they are in some respects citizens,
but not completely so, but with some exceptions, for these are not yet
arrived to years of maturity, and those are past service; nor is
there any difference between them. But what we mean is sufficiently
intelligible and clear, we want a complete citizen, one in whom there
is no deficiency to be corrected to make him so. As to those who are
banished, or infamous, there may be the same objections made and the
same answer given. There is nothing that more characterises a complete
citizen than having a share in the judicial and executive part of the
government.

With respect to offices, some are fixed to a particular time, so that
no person is, on any account, permitted to fill them twice; or else
not till some certain period has intervened; others are not fixed, as a
juryman's, and a member of the general assembly: but probably some one
may say these are not offices, nor have the citizens in these capacities
any share in the government; though surely it is ridiculous to say that
those who have the principal power in the state bear no office in it.
But this objection is of no weight, for it is only a dispute about
words; as there is no general term which can be applied both to the
office of a juryman and a member of the assembly. For the sake of
distinction, suppose we call it an indeterminate office: but I lay it
down as a maxim, that those are citizens who could exercise it. Such
then is the description of a citizen who comes nearest to what all those
who are called citizens are. Every one also should know, that of the
component parts of those things which differ from each other in species,
after the first or second remove, those which follow have either nothing
at all or very little common to each.

Now we see that governments differ from each other in their form,
and that some of them are defective, others [1275b] as excellent as
possible: for it is evident, that those which have many deficiencies
and degeneracies in them must be far inferior to those which are without
such faults. What I mean by degeneracies will be hereafter explained.
Hence it is clear that the office of a citizen must differ as
governments do from each other: for which reason he who is called
a citizen has, in a democracy, every privilege which that station
supposes. In other forms of government he may enjoy them; but not
necessarily: for in some states the people have no power; nor have they
any general assembly, but a few select men.

The trial also of different causes is allotted to different persons; as
at Lacedaemon all disputes concerning contracts are brought before some
of the ephori: the senate are the judges in cases of murder, and so on;
some being to be heard by one magistrate, others by another: and thus
at Carthage certain magistrates determine all causes. But our former
description of a citizen will admit of correction; for in some
governments the office of a juryman and a member of the general assembly
is not an indeterminate one; but there are particular persons appointed
for these purposes, some or all of the citizens being appointed jurymen
or members of the general assembly, and this either for all causes and
all public business whatsoever, or else for some particular one: and
this may be sufficient to show what a citizen is; for he who has a right
to a share in the judicial and executive part of government in any
city, him we call a citizen of that place; and a city, in one word, is
a collective body of such persons sufficient in themselves to all the
purposes of life.




CHAPTER II


In common use they define a citizen to be one who is sprung from
citizens on both sides, not on the father's or the mother's only. Others
carry the matter still further, and inquire how many of his ancestors
have been citizens, as his grandfather, great-grandfather, etc., but
some persons have questioned how the first of the family could prove
themselves citizens, according to this popular and careless definition.
Gorgias of Leontium, partly entertaining the same doubt, and partly in
jest, says, that as a mortar is made by a mortar-maker, so a citizen is
made by a citizen-maker, and a Larisssean by a Larisssean-maker. This
is indeed a very simple account of the matter; for if citizens are so,
according to this definition, it will be impossible to apply it to the
first founders or first inhabitants of states, who cannot possibly claim
in right either of their father or mother. It is probably a matter of
still more difficulty to determine their rights as citizens who are
admitted to their freedom after any revolution in the state. As, for
instance, at Athens, after the expulsion of the tyrants, when Clisthenes
enrolled many foreigners and city-slaves amongst the tribes; and the
doubt with respect to them was, not whether they were citizens or no,
but whether they were legally so or not. Though indeed some persons may
have this further [1276a] doubt, whether a citizen can be a citizen
when he is illegally made; as if an illegal citizen, and one who is
no citizen at all, were in the same predicament: but since we see some
persons govern unjustly, whom yet we admit to govern, though not justly,
and the definition of a citizen is one who exercises certain offices,
for such a one we have defined a citizen to be, it is evident, that a
citizen illegally created yet continues to be a citizen, but whether
justly or unjustly so belongs to the former inquiry.




CHAPTER III


It has also been doubted what was and what was not the act of the city;
as, for instance, when a democracy arises out of an aristocracy or a
tyranny; for some persons then refuse to fulfil their contracts; as if
the right to receive the money was in the tyrant and not in the state,
and many other things of the same nature; as if any covenant was founded
for violence and not for the common good. So in like manner, if anything
is done by those who have the management of public affairs where a
democracy is established, their actions are to be considered as the
actions of the state, as well as in the oligarchy or tyranny.

And here it seems very proper to consider this question, When shall we
say that a city is the same, and when shall we say that it is different?

It is but a superficial mode of examining into this question to begin
with the place and the people; for it may happen that these may be
divided from that, or that some one of them may live in one place, and
some in another (but this question may be regarded as no very knotty
one; for, as a city may acquire that appellation on many accounts,
it may be solved many ways); and in like manner, when men inhabit one
common place, when shall we say that they inhabit the same city, or that
the city is the same? for it does not depend upon the walls; for I can
suppose Peloponnesus itself surrounded with a wall, as Babylon was, and
every other place, which rather encircles many nations than one city,
and that they say was taken three days when some of the inhabitants
knew nothing of it: but we shall find a proper time to determine this
question; for the extent of a city, how large it should be, and whether
it should consist of more than one people, these are particulars that
the politician should by no means be unacquainted with. This, too, is a
matter of inquiry, whether we shall say that a city is the same while
it is inhabited by the same race of men, though some of them are
perpetually dying, others coming into the world, as we say that a river
or a fountain is the same, though the waters are continually changing;
or when a revolution takes place shall we [1276b] say the men are the
same, but the city is different: for if a city is a community, it is a
community of citizens; but if the mode of government should alter, and
become of another sort, it would seem a necessary consequence that the
city is not the same; as we regard the tragic chorus as different from
the comic, though it may probably consist of the same performers: thus
every other community or composition is said to be different if the
species of composition is different; as in music the same hands produce
different harmony, as the Doric and Phrygian. If this is true, it is
evident, that when we speak of a city as being the same we refer to the
government there established; and this, whether it is called by the
same name or any other, or inhabited by the same men or different.
But whether or no it is right to dissolve the community when the
constitution is altered is another question.




CHAPTER IV


What has been said, it follows that we should consider whether the
same virtues which constitute a good man make a valuable citizen, or
different; and if a particular inquiry is necessary for this matter we
must first give a general description of the virtues of a good citizen;
for as a sailor is one of those who make up a community, so is a
citizen, although the province of one sailor may be different from
another's (for one is a rower, another a steersman, a third a boatswain,
and so on, each having their several appointments), it is evident that
the most accurate description of any one good sailor must refer to
his peculiar abilities, yet there are some things in which the same
description may be applied to the whole crew, as the safety of the ship
is the common business of all of them, for this is the general centre of
all their cares: so also with respect to citizens, although they may
in a few particulars be very different, yet there is one care common to
them all, the safety of the community, for the community of the citizens
composes the state; for which reason the virtue of a citizen has
necessarily a reference to the state. But if there are different sorts
of governments, it is evident that those actions which constitute the
virtue of an excellent citizen in one community will not constitute it
in another; wherefore the virtue of such a one cannot be perfect: but we
say, a man is good when his virtues are perfect; from whence it follows,
that an excellent citizen does not possess that virtue which constitutes
a good man. Those who are any ways doubtful concerning this question
may be convinced of the truth of it by examining into the best formed
states: for, if it is impossible that a city should consist entirely of
excellent citizens (while it is necessary that every one should do well
in his calling, in which consists his excellence, as it is impossible
that all the citizens should have the same [1277a] qualifications) it
is impossible that the virtue of a citizen and a good man should be the
same; for all should possess the virtue of an excellent citizen: for
from hence necessarily arise the perfection of the city: but that every
one should possess the virtue of a good man is impossible without
all the citizens in a well-regulated state were necessarily virtuous.
Besides, as a city is composed of dissimilar parts, as an animal is of
life and body; the soul of reason and appetite; a family of a man and
his wife--property of a master and a slave; in the same manner, as a
city is composed of all these and many other very different parts, it
necessarily follows that the virtue of all the citizens cannot be the
same; as the business of him who leads the band is different from the
other dancers. From all which proofs it is evident that the virtues of
a citizen cannot be one and the same. But do we never find those virtues
united which constitute a good man and excellent citizen? for we say,
such a one is an excellent magistrate and a prudent and good man; but
prudence is a necessary qualification for all those who engage in public
affairs. Nay, some persons affirm that the education of those who are
intended to command should, from the beginning, be different from other
citizens, as the children of kings are generally instructed in riding
and warlike exercises; and thus Euripides says:

  "... No showy arts Be mine, but teach me what the state requires."

As if those who are to rule were to have an education peculiar to
themselves. But if we allow, that the virtues of a good man and a
good magistrate may be the same, and a citizen is one who obeys the
magistrate, it follows that the virtue of the one cannot in general be
the same as the virtue of the other, although it may be true of some
particular citizen; for the virtue of the magistrate must be different
from the virtue of the citizen. For which reason Jason declared that
was he deprived of his kingdom he should pine away with regret, as not
knowing how to live a private man. But it is a great recommendation to
know how to command as well as to obey; and to do both these things well
is the virtue of an accomplished citizen. If then the virtue of a good
man consists only in being able to command, but the virtue of a good
citizen renders him equally fit for the one as well as the other, the
commendation of both of them is not the same. It appears, then, that
both he who commands and he who obeys should each of them learn their
separate business: but that the citizen should be master of and
take part in both these, as any one may easily perceive; in a family
government there is no occasion for the master to know how to perform
the necessary offices, but rather to enjoy the labour of others; for to
do the other is a servile part. I mean by the other, the common family
business of the slave.

There are many sorts of slaves; for their employments are various: of
these the handicraftsmen are one, who, as their name imports, get their
living by the labour of their hands, and amongst these all mechanics are
included; [1277b] for which reasons such workmen, in some states, were
not formerly admitted into any share in the government; till at length
democracies were established: it is not therefore proper for any man
of honour, or any citizen, or any one who engages in public affairs, to
learn these servile employments without they have occasion for them for
their own use; for without this was observed the distinction between a
master and a slave would be lost. But there is a government of another
sort, in which men govern those who are their equals in rank, and
freemen, which we call a political government, in which men learn to
command by first submitting to obey, as a good general of horse, or a
commander-in-chief, must acquire a knowledge of their duty by
having been long under the command of another, and the like in every
appointment in the army: for well is it said, no one knows how to
command who has not himself been under command of another. The virtues
of those are indeed different, but a good citizen must necessarily be
endowed with them; he ought also to know in what manner freemen ought
to govern, as well as be governed: and this, too, is the duty of a good
man. And if the temperance and justice of him who commands is different
from his who, though a freeman, is under command, it is evident that the
virtues of a good citizen cannot be the same as justice, for instance
but must be of a different species in these two different situations, as
the temperance and courage of a man and a woman are different from each
other; for a man would appear a coward who had only that courage which
would be graceful in a woman, and a woman would be thought a talker who
should take as large a part in the conversation as would become a man of
consequence.

The domestic employments of each of them are also different; it is the
man's business to acquire subsistence, the woman's to take care of it.
But direction and knowledge of public affairs is a virtue peculiar to
those who govern, while all others seem to be equally requisite for both
parties; but with this the governed have no concern, it is theirs to
entertain just notions: they indeed are like flute-makers, while those
who govern are the musicians who play on them. And thus much to show
whether the virtue of a good man and an excellent citizen is the same,
or if it is different, and also how far it is the same, and how far
different.




CHAPTER V


But with respect to citizens there is a doubt remaining, whether those
only are truly so who are allowed to share in the government, or whether
the mechanics also are to be considered as such? for if those who are
not permitted to rule are to be reckoned among them, it is impossible
that the virtue of all the citizens should be the same, for these also
are citizens; and if none of them are admitted to be citizens, where
shall they be ranked? for they are neither [1278a] sojourners nor
foreigners? or shall we say that there will no inconvenience arise from
their not being citizens, as they are neither slaves nor freedmen:
for this is certainly true, that all those are not citizens who are
necessary to the existence of a city, as boys are not citizens in the
same manner that men are, for those are perfectly so, the others under
some conditions; for they are citizens, though imperfect ones: for
in former times among some people the mechanics were either slaves or
foreigners, for which reason many of them are so now: and indeed the
best regulated states will not permit a mechanic to be a citizen; but
if it be allowed them, we cannot then attribute the virtue we have
described to every citizen or freeman, but to those only who are
disengaged from servile offices. Now those who are employed by one
person in them are slaves; those who do them for money are mechanics
and hired servants: hence it is evident on the least reflection what is
their situation, for what I have said is fully explained by appearances.
Since the number of communities is very great, it follows necessarily
that there will be many different sorts of citizens, particularly
of those who are governed by others, so that in one state it may be
necessary to admit mechanics and hired servants to be citizens, but in
others it may be impossible; as particularly in an aristocracy, where
honours are bestowed on virtue and dignity: for it is impossible for
one who lives the life of a mechanic or hired servant to acquire the
practice of virtue. In an oligarchy also hired servants are not admitted
to be citizens; because there a man's right to bear any office is
regulated by his fortune; but mechanics are, for many citizens are very
rich.

There was a law at Thebes that no one could have a share in the
government till he had been ten years out of trade. In many states the
law invites strangers to accept the freedom of the city; and in some
democracies the son of a free-woman is himself free. The same is also
observed in many others with respect to natural children; but it is
through want of citizens regularly born that they admit such: for these
laws are always made in consequence of a scarcity of inhabitants; so,
as their numbers increase, they first deprive the children of a male or
female slave of this privilege, next the child of a free-woman, and last
of all they will admit none but those whose fathers and mothers were
both free.

That there are many sorts of citizens, and that he may be said to be as
completely who shares the honours of the state, is evident from what
has been already said. Thus Achilles, in Homer, complains of Agamemnon's
treating him like an unhonoured stranger; for a stranger or sojourner is
one who does not partake of the honours of the state: and whenever the
right to the freedom of the city is kept obscure, it is for the sake of
the inhabitants. [1278b] From what has been said it is plain whether the
virtue of a good man and an excellent citizen is the same or different:
and we find that in some states it is the same, in others not; and also
that this is not true of each citizen, but of those only who take the
lead, or are capable of taking the lead, in public affairs, either alone
or in conjunction with others.




CHAPTER VI


Having established these points, we proceed next to consider whether one
form of government only should be established, or more than one; and if
more, how many, and of what sort, and what are the differences between
them. The form of government is the ordering and regulating of the city,
and all the offices in it, particularly those wherein the supreme power
is lodged; and this power is always possessed by the administration; but
the administration itself is that particular form of government which
is established in any state: thus in a democracy the supreme power is
lodged in the whole people; on the contrary, in an oligarchy it is in
the hands of a few. We say then, that the form of government in these
states is different, and we shall find the same thing hold good in
others. Let us first determine for whose sake a city is established;
and point out the different species of rule which man may submit to in
social life.

I have already mentioned in my treatise on the management of a family,
and the power of the master, that man is an animal naturally formed
for society, and that therefore, when he does not want any foreign
assistance, he will of his own accord desire to live with others; not
but that mutual advantage induces them to it, as far as it enables each
person to live more agreeably; and this is indeed the great object
not only to all in general, but also to each individual: but it is not
merely matter of choice, but they join in society also, even that they
may be able to live, which probably is not without some share of merit,
and they also support civil society, even for the sake of preserving
life, without they are grievously overwhelmed with the miseries of it:
for it is very evident that men will endure many calamities for the sake
of living, as being something naturally sweet and desirable. It is easy
to point out the different modes of government, and we have already
settled them in our exoteric discourses. The power of the master, though
by nature equally serviceable, both to the master and to the slave, yet
nevertheless has for its object the benefit of the master, while the
benefit of the slave arises accidentally; for if the slave is destroyed,
the power of the master is at an end: but the authority which a man
has over his wife, and children, and his family, which we call domestic
government, is either for the benefit of those who are under subjection,
or else for the common benefit of the whole: but its particular object
is the benefit of the governed, as we see in other arts; in physic, for
instance, and the gymnastic exercises, wherein, if any benefit [1279a]
arise to the master, it is accidental; for nothing forbids the master of
the exercises from sometimes being himself one of those who exercises,
as the steersman is always one of the sailors; but both the master of
the exercises and the steersman consider the good of those who are under
their government. Whatever good may happen to the steersman when he is
a sailor, or to the master of the exercises when he himself makes one at
the games, is not intentional, or the object of their power; thus in all
political governments which are established to preserve and defend the
equality of the citizens it is held right to rule by turns. Formerly, as
was natural, every one expected that each of his fellow-citizens should
in his turn serve the public, and thus administer to his private good,
as he himself when in office had done for others; but now every one is
desirous of being continually in power, that he may enjoy the advantage
which he makes of public business and being in office; as if places were
a never-failing remedy for every complaint, and were on that account so
eagerly sought after.

It is evident, then, that all those governments which have a common good
in view are rightly established and strictly just, but those who have
in view only the good of the rulers are all founded on wrong principles,
and are widely different from what a government ought to be, for they
are tyranny over slaves, whereas a city is a community of freemen.




CHAPTER VII


Having established these particulars, we come to consider next the
different number of governments which there are, and what they are; and
first, what are their excellencies: for when we have determined this,
their defects will be evident enough.

It is evident that every form of government or administration, for the
words are of the same import, must contain a supreme power over the
whole state, and this supreme power must necessarily be in the hands
of one person, or a few, or many; and when either of these apply their
power for the common good, such states are well governed; but when the
interest of the one, the few, or the many who enjoy this power is alone
consulted, then ill; for you must either affirm that those who make
up the community are not citizens, or else let these share in the
advantages of government. We usually call a state which is governed by
one person for the common good, a kingdom; one that is governed by
more than one, but by a few only, an aristocracy; either because the
government is in the hands of the most worthy citizens, or because it
is the best form for the city and its inhabitants. When the citizens at
large govern for the public good, it is called a state; which is also
a common name for all other governments, and these distinctions are
consonant to reason; for it will not be difficult to find one person,
or a very few, of very distinguished abilities, but almost impossible to
meet with the majority [1279b] of a people eminent for every virtue;
but if there is one common to a whole nation it is valour; for this is
created and supported by numbers: for which reason in such a state
the profession of arms will always have the greatest share in the
government.

Now the corruptions attending each of these governments are these; a
kingdom may degenerate into a tyranny, an aristocracy into an oligarchy,
and a state into a democracy. Now a tyranny is a monarchy where the good
of one man only is the object of government, an oligarchy considers
only the rich, and a democracy only the poor; but neither of them have a
common good in view.




CHAPTER VIII


It will be necessary to enlarge a little more upon the nature of each
of these states, which is not without some difficulty, for he who would
enter into a philosophical inquiry into the principles of them, and not
content himself with a superficial view of their outward conduct, must
pass over and omit nothing, but explain the true spirit of each of them.
A tyranny then is, as has been said, a monarchy, where one person has
an absolute and despotic power over the whole community and every member
therein: an oligarchy, where the supreme power of the state is lodged
with the rich: a democracy, on the contrary, is where those have it who
are worth little or nothing. But the first difficulty that arises from
the distinctions which we have laid down is this, should it happen that
the majority of the inhabitants who possess the power of the state (for
this is a democracy) should be rich, the question is, how does this
agree with what we have said? The same difficulty occurs, should it ever
happen that the poor compose a smaller part of the people than the rich,
but from their superior abilities acquire the supreme power; for this is
what they call an oligarchy; it should seem then that our definition
of the different states was not correct: nay, moreover, could any one
suppose that the majority of the people were poor, and the minority
rich, and then describe the state in this manner, that an oligarchy
was a government in which the rich, being few in number, possessed the
supreme power, and that a democracy was a state in which the poor, being
many in number, possessed it, still there will be another difficulty;
for what name shall we give to those states we have been describing? I
mean, that in which the greater number are rich, and that in which the
lesser number are poor (where each of these possess the supreme power),
if there are no other states than those we have described. It seems
therefore evident to reason, that whether the supreme power is vested
in the hands of many or few may be a matter of accident; but that it
is clear enough, that when it is in the hands of the few, it will be
a government of the rich; when in the hands of the many, it will be a
government of the poor; since in all countries there are many poor and
few rich: it is not therefore the cause that has been already assigned
(namely, the number of people in power) that makes the difference
between the two governments; but an oligarchy and democracy differ in
this from each other, in the poverty of those who govern in the one,
and the riches I28oa of those who govern in the other; for when the
government is in the hands of the rich, be they few or be they more, it
is an oligarchy; when it is in the hands of the poor, it is a democracy:
but, as we have already said, the one will be always few, the other
numerous, but both will enjoy liberty; and from the claims of wealth and
liberty will arise continual disputes with each other for the lead in
public affairs.




CHAPTER IX


Let us first determine what are the proper limits of an oligarchy and
a democracy, and what is just in each of these states; for all men have
some natural inclination to justice; but they proceed therein only to
a certain degree; nor can they universally point out what is absolutely
just; as, for instance, what is equal appears just, and is so; but not
to all; only among those who are equals: and what is unequal appears
just, and is so; but not to all, only amongst those who are unequals;
which circumstance some people neglect, and therefore judge ill; the
reason for which is, they judge for themselves, and every one almost is
the worst judge in his own cause. Since then justice has reference to
persons, the same distinctions must be made with respect to persons
which are made with respect to things, in the manner that I have already
described in my Ethics.

As to the equality of the things, these they agree in; but their dispute
is concerning the equality of the persons, and chiefly for the reason
above assigned; because they judge ill in their own cause; and also
because each party thinks, that if they admit what is right in some
particulars, they have done justice on the whole: thus, for instance,
if some persons are unequal in riches, they suppose them unequal in the
whole; or, on the contrary, if they are equal in liberty, they suppose
them equal in the whole: but what is absolutely just they omit; for
if civil society was founded for the sake of preserving and increasing
property, every one's right in the city would be equal to his fortune;
and then the reasoning of those who insist upon an oligarchy would be
valid; for it would not be right that he who contributed one mina should
have an equal share in the hundred along with him who brought in all the
rest, either of the original money or what was afterwards acquired.

Nor was civil society founded merely to preserve the lives of its
members; but that they might live well: for otherwise a state might
be composed of slaves, or the animal creation: but this is not so; for
these have no share in the happiness of it; nor do they live after their
own choice; nor is it an alliance mutually to defend each other from
injuries, or for a commercial intercourse: for then the Tyrrhenians and
Carthaginians, and all other nations between whom treaties of commerce
subsist, would be citizens of one city; for they have articles
to regulate their exports and imports, and engagements for mutual
protection, and alliances for mutual defence; but [1280b] yet they
have not all the same magistrates established among them, but they are
different among the different people; nor does the one take any care,
that the morals of the other should be as they ought, or that none of
those who have entered into the common agreements should be unjust, or
in any degree vicious, only that they do not injure any member of the
confederacy. But whosoever endeavours to establish wholesome laws in
a state, attends to the virtues and the vices of each individual who
composes it; from whence it is evident, that the first care of him who
would found a city, truly deserving that name, and not nominally so,
must be to have his citizens virtuous; for otherwise it is merely an
alliance for self-defence; differing from those of the same cast which
are made between different people only in place: for law is an agreement
and a pledge, as the sophist Lycophron says, between the citizens of
their intending to do justice to each other, though not sufficient to
make all the citizens just and good: and that this is fact is evident,
for could any one bring different places together, as, for instance,
enclose Megara and Corinth in a wall, yet they would not be one city,
not even if the inhabitants intermarried with each other, though this
inter-community contributes much to make a place one city. Besides,
could we suppose a set of people to live separate from each other, but
within such a distance as would admit of an intercourse, and that there
were laws subsisting between each party, to prevent their injuring one
another in their mutual dealings, supposing one a carpenter, another
a husbandman, shoemaker, and the like, and that their numbers were ten
thousand, still all that they would have together in common would be a
tariff for trade, or an alliance for mutual defence, but not the same
city. And why? not because their mutual intercourse is not near enough,
for even if persons so situated should come to one place, and every one
should live in his own house as in his native city, and there should be
alliances subsisting between each party to mutually assist and prevent
any injury being done to the other, still they would not be admitted
to be a city by those who think correctly, if they preserved the same
customs when they were together as when they were separate.

It is evident, then, that a city is not a community of place; nor
established for the sake of mutual safety or traffic with each other;
but that these things are the necessary consequences of a city, although
they may all exist where there is no city: but a city is a society of
people joining together with their families and their children to live
agreeably for the sake of having their lives as happy and as independent
as possible: and for this purpose it is necessary that they should live
in one place and intermarry with each other: hence in all cities there
are family-meetings, clubs, sacrifices, and public entertainments to
promote friendship; for a love of sociability is friendship itself;
so that the end then for which a city is established is, that the
inhabitants of it may live happy, and these things are conducive to that
end: for it is a community of families and villages for the sake of a
perfect independent life; that is, as we have already said, for the sake
of living well and happily. It is not therefore founded for the purpose
of men's merely [1281a] living together, but for their living as men
ought; for which reason those who contribute most to this end deserve to
have greater power in the city than those who are their equals in family
and freedom, but their inferiors in civil virtue, or those who excel
them in wealth but are below them in worth. It is evident from what
has been said, that in all disputes upon government each party says
something that is just.




CHAPTER X


It may also be a doubt where the supreme power ought to be lodged.
Shall it be with the majority, or the wealthy, with a number of proper
persons, or one better than the rest, or with a tyrant? But whichever
of these we prefer some difficulty will arise. For what? shall the
poor have it because they are the majority? they may then divide among
themselves, what belongs to the rich: nor is this unjust; because truly
it has been so judged by the supreme power. But what avails it to point
out what is the height of injustice if this is not? Again, if the many
seize into their own hands everything which belongs to the few, it is
evident that the city will be at an end. But virtue will never destroy
what is virtuous; nor can what is right be the ruin of the state:
therefore such a law can never be right, nor can the acts of a tyrant
ever be wrong, for of necessity they must all be just; for he, from his
unlimited power, compels every one to obey his command, as the multitude
oppress the rich. Is it right then that the rich, the few, should have
the supreme power? and what if they be guilty of the same rapine and
plunder the possessions of the majority, that will be as right as the
other: but that all things of this sort are wrong and unjust is evident.
Well then, these of the better sort shall have it: but must not then all
the other citizens live unhonoured, without sharing the offices of the
city; for the offices of a city are its honours, and if one set of men
are always in power, it is evident that the rest must be without honour.
Well then, let it be with one person of all others the fittest for it:
but by this means the power will be still more contracted, and a greater
number than before continue unhonoured. But some one may say, that it is
wrong to let man have the supreme power and not the law, as his soul is
subject to so many passions. But if this law appoints an aristocracy, or
a democracy, how will it help us in our present doubts? for those things
will happen which we have already mentioned.




CHAPTER XI


Other particulars we will consider separately; but it seems proper to
prove, that the supreme power ought to be lodged with the many, rather
than with those of the better sort, who are few; and also to explain
what doubts (and probably just ones) may arise: now, though not one
individual of the many may himself be fit for the supreme power, yet
when these many are joined together, it does not follow but they may be
better qualified for it than those; and this not separately, but as a
collective body; as the public suppers exceed those which are given at
one person's private expense: for, as they are many, each person brings
in his share of virtue and wisdom; and thus, coming together, they are
like one man made up of a multitude, with many feet, many hands,
and many intelligences: thus is it with respect to the manners and
understandings of the multitude taken together; for which reason the
public are the best judges of music and poetry; for some understand
one part, some another, and all collectively the whole; and in this
particular men of consequence differ from each of the many; as they
say those who are beautiful do from those who are not so, and as fine
pictures excel any natural objects, by collecting the several beautiful
parts which were dispersed among different originals into one, although
the separate parts, as the eye or any other, might be handsomer than in
the picture.

But if this distinction is to be made between every people and every
general assembly, and some few men of consequence, it may be doubtful
whether it is true; nay, it is clear enough that, with respect to a few,
it is not; since the same conclusion might be applied even to brutes:
and indeed wherein do some men differ from brutes? Not but that nothing
prevents what I have said being true of the people in some states. The
doubt then which we have lately proposed, with all its consequences, may
be settled in this manner; it is necessary that the freemen who compose
the bulk of the people should have absolute power in some things; but as
they are neither men of property, nor act uniformly upon principles
of virtue, it is not safe to trust them with the first offices in the
state, both on account of their iniquity and their ignorance; from
the one of which they will do what is wrong, from the other they will
mistake: and yet it is dangerous to allow them no power or share in the
government; for when there are many poor people who are incapable of
acquiring the honours of their country, the state must necessarily have
many enemies in it; let them then be permitted to vote in the public
assemblies and to determine causes; for which reason Socrates, and some
other legislators, gave them the power of electing the officers of the
state, and also of inquiring into their conduct when they came out of
office, and only prevented their being magistrates by themselves;
for the multitude when they are collected together have all of them
sufficient understanding for these purposes, and, mixing among those of
higher rank, are serviceable to the city, as some things, which alone
are improper for food, when mixed with others make the whole more
wholesome than a few of them would be.

But there is a difficulty attending this form of government, for it
seems, that the person who himself was capable of curing any one who
was then sick, must be the best judge whom to employ as a physician; but
such a one must be himself a physician; and the same holds true in every
other practice and art: and as a physician ought [1282a] to give an
account of his practice to a physician, so ought it to be in other arts:
those whose business is physic may be divided into three sorts, the
first of these is he who makes up the medicines; the second prescribes,
and is to the other as the architect is to the mason; the third is he
who understands the science, but never practises it: now these three
distinctions may be found in those who understand all other arts; nor
have we less opinion of their judgment who are only instructed in the
principles of the art than of those who practise it: and with respect
to elections the same method of proceeding seems right; for to elect a
proper person in any science is the business of those who are skilful
therein; as in geometry, of geometricians; in steering, of steersmen:
but if some individuals should know something of particular arts and
works, they do not know more than the professors of them: so that even
upon this principle neither the election of magistrates, nor the censure
of their conduct, should be entrusted to the many.

But probably all that has been here said may not be right; for, to
resume the argument I lately used, if the people are not very brutal
indeed, although we allow that each individual knows less of these
affairs than those who have given particular attention to them, yet when
they come together they will know them better, or at least not worse;
besides, in some particular arts it is not the workman only who is the
best judge; namely, in those the works of which are understood by those
who do not profess them: thus he who builds a house is not the only
judge of it, for the master of the family who inhabits it is a better;
thus also a steersman is a better judge of a tiller than he who made
it; and he who gives an entertainment than the cook. What has been said
seems a sufficient solution of this difficulty; but there is another
that follows: for it seems absurd that the power of the state should be
lodged with those who are but of indifferent morals, instead of those
who are of excellent characters. Now the power of election and censure
are of the utmost consequence, and this, as has been said, in some
states they entrust to the people; for the general assembly is the
supreme court of all, and they have a voice in this, and deliberate in
all public affairs, and try all causes, without any objection to the
meanness of their circumstances, and at any age: but their treasurers,
generals, and other great officers of state are taken from men of great
fortune and worth. This difficulty also may be solved upon the same
principle; and here too they may be right, for the power is not in the
man who is member of the assembly, or council, but the assembly itself,
and the council, and the people, of which each individual of the whole
community are the parts, I mean as senator, adviser, or judge; for which
reason it is very right, that the many should have the greatest powers
in their own hands; for the people, the council, and the judges are
composed of them, and the property of all these collectively is more
than the property of any person or a few who fill the great offices of
the state: and thus I determine these points.

The first question that we stated shows plainly, that the supreme
power should be lodged in laws duly made and that the magistrate or
magistrates, either one or more, should be authorised to determine those
cases which the laws cannot particularly speak to, as it is impossible
for them, in general language, to explain themselves upon everything
that may arise: but what these laws are which are established upon the
best foundations has not been yet explained, but still remains a matter
of some question: but the laws of every state will necessarily be like
every state, either trifling or excellent, just or unjust; for it is
evident, that the laws must be framed correspondent to the constitution
of the government; and, if so, it is plain, that a well-formed
government will have good laws, a bad one, bad ones.




CHAPTER XII


Since in every art and science the end aimed at is always good, so
particularly in this, which is the most excellent of all, the founding
of civil society, the good wherein aimed at is justice; for it is this
which is for the benefit of all. Now, it is the common opinion, that
justice is a certain equality; and in this point all the philosophers
are agreed when they treat of morals: for they say what is just, and to
whom; and that equals ought to receive equal: but we should know how
we are to determine what things are equal and what unequal; and in
this there is some difficulty, which calls for the philosophy of the
politician. Some persons will probably say, that the employments of the
state ought to be given according to every particular excellence of each
citizen, if there is no other difference between them and the rest of
the community, but they are in every respect else alike: for justice
attributes different things to persons differing from each other in
their character, according to their respective merits. But if this is
admitted to be true, complexion, or height, or any such advantage will
be a claim for a greater share of the public rights. But that this is
evidently absurd is clear from other arts and sciences; for with respect
to musicians who play on the flute together, the best flute is not given
to him who is of the best family, for he will play never the better for
that, but the best instrument ought to be given to him who is the best
artist.

If what is now said does not make this clear, we will explain it still
further: if there should be any one, a very excellent player on the
flute, but very deficient in family and beauty, though each of them are
more valuable endowments than a skill in music, and excel this art in a
higher degree than that player excels others, yet the best flutes ought
to be given to him; for the superiority [1283a] in beauty and fortune
should have a reference to the business in hand; but these have none.
Moreover, according to this reasoning, every possible excellence might
come in comparison with every other; for if bodily strength might
dispute the point with riches or liberty, even any bodily strength might
do it; so that if one person excelled in size more than another did in
virtue, and his size was to qualify him to take place of the other's
virtue, everything must then admit of a comparison with each other; for
if such a size is greater than virtue by so much, it is evident another
must be equal to it: but, since this is impossible, it is plain that it
would be contrary to common sense to dispute a right to any office in
the state from every superiority whatsoever: for if one person is slow
and the other swift, neither is the one better qualified nor the other
worse on that account, though in the gymnastic races a difference in
these particulars would gain the prize; but a pretension to the offices
of the state should be founded on a superiority in those qualifications
which are useful to it: for which reason those of family, independency,
and fortune, with great propriety, contend with each other for them; for
these are the fit persons to fill them: for a city can no more consist
of all poor men than it can of all slaves But if such persons are
requisite, it is evident that those also who are just and valiant are
equally so; for without justice and valour no state can be supported,
the former being necessary for its existence, the latter for its
happiness.




CHAPTER XIII


It seems, then, requisite for the establishment of a state, that all, or
at least many of these particulars should be well canvassed and inquired
into; and that virtue and education may most justly claim the right of
being considered as the necessary means of making the citizens happy, as
we have already said. As those who are equal in one particular are not
therefore equal in all, and those who are unequal in one particular
are not therefore unequal in all, it follows that all those governments
which are established upon a principle which supposes they are, are
erroneous.

We have already said, that all the members of the community will dispute
with each other for the offices of the state; and in some particulars
justly, but not so in general; the rich, for instance, because they
have the greatest landed property, and the ultimate right to the soil is
vested in the community; and also because their fidelity is in general
most to be depended on. The freemen and men of family will dispute the
point with each other, as nearly on an equality; for these latter have
a right to a higher regard as citizens than obscure persons, for
honourable descent is everywhere of great esteem: nor is it an improper
conclusion, that the descendants of men of worth will be men of worth
themselves; for noble birth is the fountain of virtue to men of family:
for the same reason also we justly say, that virtue has a right to put
in her pretensions. Justice, for instance, is a virtue, and so necessary
to society, that all others must yield her the precedence.

Let us now see what the many have to urge on their side against the few;
and they may say, that if, when collectively taken, they are compared
with them, they are stronger, richer, and better than they are. But
should it ever happen that all these should inhabit the [1283b] same
city, I mean the good, the rich, the noble, as well as the many, such as
usually make up the community, I ask, will there then be any reason to
dispute concerning who shall govern, or will there not? for in every
community which we have mentioned there is no dispute where the supreme
power should be placed; for as these differ from each other, so do those
in whom that is placed; for in one state the rich enjoy it, in others
the meritorious, and thus each according to their separate manners. Let
us however consider what is to be done when all these happen at the same
time to inhabit the same city. If the virtuous should be very few in
number, how then shall we act? shall we prefer the virtuous on account
of their abilities, if they are capable of governing the city? or should
they be so many as almost entirely to compose the state?

There is also a doubt concerning the pretensions of all those who claim
the honours of government: for those who found them either on fortune or
family have nothing which they can justly say in their defence; since
it is evident upon their principle, that if any one person can be found
richer than all the rest, the right of governing all these will be
justly vested in this one person. In the same manner, one man who is
of the best family will claim it from those who dispute the point upon
family merit: and probably in an aristocracy the same dispute might
arise on the score of virtue, if there is one man better than all the
other men of worth who are in the same community; it seems just, by the
same reasoning, that he should enjoy the supreme power. And upon this
principle also, while the many suppose they ought to have the supreme
command, as being more powerful than the few, if one or more than one,
though a small number should be found stronger than themselves, these
ought rather to have it than they.

All these things seem to make it plain, that none of these principles
are justly founded on which these persons would establish their right to
the supreme power; and that all men whatsoever ought to obey them:
for with respect to those who claim it as due to their virtue or their
fortune, they might have justly some objection to make; for nothing
hinders but that it may sometimes happen, that the many may be better
or richer than the few, not as individuals, but in their collective
capacity.

As to the doubt which some persons have proposed and objected, we may
answer it in this manner; it is this, whether a legislator, who would
establish the most perfect system of laws, should calculate them for
the use of the better part of the citizens, or the many, in the
circumstances we have already mentioned? The rectitude of anything
consists in its equality; that therefore which is equally right will be
advantageous to the whole state, and to every member of it in common.

Now, in general, a citizen is one who both shares in the government and
also in his turn submits to be governed; [1284a] their condition, it is
true, is different in different states: the best is that in which a man
is enabled to choose and to persevere in a course of virtue during his
whole life, both in his public and private state. But should there be
one person, or a very few, eminent for an uncommon degree of virtue,
though not enough to make up a civil state, so that the virtue of the
many, or their political abilities, should be too inferior to come in
comparison with theirs, if more than one; or if but one, with his only;
such are not to be considered as part of the city; for it would be doing
them injustice to rate them on a level with those who are so far their
inferiors in virtue and political abilities, that they appear to them
like a god amongst men. From whence it is evident, that a system of laws
must be calculated for those who are equal to each other in nature and
power. Such men, therefore, are not the object of law; for they are
themselves a law: and it would be ridiculous in any one to endeavour to
include them in the penalties of a law: for probably they might say what
Antisthenes tells us the lions did to the hares when they demanded to
be admitted to an equal share with them in the government. And it is on
this account that democratic states have established the ostracism; for
an equality seems the principal object of their government. For which
reason they compel all those who are very eminent for their power, their
fortune, their friendships, or any other cause which may give them too
great weight in the government, to submit to the ostracism, and leave
the city for a stated time; as the fabulous histories relate the
Argonauts served Hercules, for they refused to take him with them in the
ship Argo on account of his superior valour. For which reason those who
hate a tyranny and find fault with the advice which Periander gave to
Thrasybulus, must not think there was nothing to be said in its defence;
for the story goes, that Periander said nothing to the messenger in
answer to the business he was consulted about, but striking off those
ears of corn which were higher than the rest, reduced the whole crop to
a level; so that the messenger, without knowing the cause of what was
done, related the fact to Thrasybulus, who understood by it that he must
take off all the principal men in the city. Nor is this serviceable to
tyrants only; nor is it tyrants only who do it; for the same thing is
practised both in oligarchies and democracies: for the ostracism has in
a manner nearly the same power, by restraining and banishing those who
are too great; and what is done in one city is done also by those who
have the supreme power in separate states; as the Athenians with respect
to the Samians, the Chians, and the Lesbians; for when they suddenly
acquired the superiority over all Greece, they brought the other states
into subjection, contrary to the treaties which subsisted between them.
The King of Persia also very often reduces the Medes and Babylonians
when they assume upon their former power: [1284b] and this is a
principle which all governments whatsoever keep in their eye; even those
which are best administered, as well as those which are not, do it;
these for the sake of private utility, the others for the public good.

The same thing is to be perceived in the other arts and sciences; for
a painter would not represent an animal with a foot disproportionally
large, though he had drawn it remarkably beautiful; nor would the
shipwright make the prow or any other part of the vessel larger than it
ought to be; nor will the master of the band permit any who sings
louder and better than the rest to sing in concert with them. There is
therefore no reason that a monarch should not act in agreement with
free states, to support his own power, if they do the same thing for the
benefit of their respective communities; upon which account when there
is any acknowledged difference in the power of the citizens, the reason
upon which the ostracism is founded will be politically just; but it is
better for the legislator so to establish his state at the beginning as
not to want this remedy: but if in course of time such an inconvenience
should arise, to endeavour to amend it by some such correction. Not that
this was the use it was put to: for many did not regard the benefit of
their respective communities, but made the ostracism a weapon in the
hand of sedition.

It is evident, then, that in corrupt governments it is partly just and
useful to the individual, though probably it is as clear that it is not
entirely just: for in a well-governed state there may be great doubts
about the use of it, not on account of the pre-eminence which one may
have in strength, riches, or connection: but when the pre-eminence is
virtue, what then is to be done? for it seems not right to turn out and
banish such a one; neither does it seem right to govern him, for that
would be like desiring to share the power with Jupiter and to govern
him: nothing then remains but what indeed seems natural, and that is for
all persons quietly to submit to the government of those who are thus
eminently virtuous, and let them be perpetually kings in the separate
states.




CHAPTER XIV


What has been now said, it seems proper to change our subject and to
inquire into the nature of monarchies; for we have already admitted them
to be one of those species of government which are properly founded. And
here let us consider whether a kingly government is proper for a city or
a country whose principal object is the happiness of the inhabitants,
or rather some other. But let us first determine whether this is of one
kind only, or more; [1285a] and it is easy to know that it consists of
many different species, and that the forms of government are not the
same in all: for at Sparta the kingly power seems chiefly regulated by
the laws; for it is not supreme in all circumstances; but when the king
quits the territories of the state he is their general in war; and all
religious affairs are entrusted to him: indeed the kingly power with
them is chiefly that of a general who cannot be called to an account for
his conduct, and whose command is for life: for he has not the power
of life and death, except as a general; as they frequently had in
their expeditions by martial law, which we learn from Homer; for when
Agamemnon is affronted in council, he restrains his resentment, but when
he is in the field and armed with this power, he tells the Greeks:

  "Whoe'er I know shall shun th' impending fight,
   To dogs and vultures soon shall be a prey; For death is mine...."

This, then, is one species of monarchical government in which the kingly
power is in a general for life; and is sometimes hereditary, sometimes
elective: besides, there is also another, which is to be met with among
some of the barbarians, in which the kings are invested with powers
nearly equal to a tyranny, yet are, in some respects, bound by the laws
and the customs of their country; for as the barbarians are by nature
more prone to slavery than the Greeks, and those in Asia more than those
in Europe, they endure without murmuring a despotic government; for
this reason their governments are tyrannies; but yet not liable to be
overthrown, as being customary and according to law. Their guards also
are such as are used in a kingly government, not a despotic one; for the
guards of their kings are his citizens, but a tyrant's are foreigners.
The one commands, in the manner the law directs, those who willingly
obey; the other, arbitrarily, those who consent not. The one, therefore,
is guarded by the citizens, the other against them.

These, then, are the two different sorts of these monarchies, and
another is that which in ancient Greece they called _aesumnetes_; which
is nothing more than an elective tyranny; and its difference from that
which is to be found amongst the barbarians consists not in its not
being according to law, but only in its not being according to the
ancient customs of the country. Some persons possessed this power for
life, others only for a particular time or particular purpose, as the
people of Mitylene elected Pittacus to oppose the exiles, who were
headed by Antimenides and Alcaeus the poet, as we learn from a poem
of his; for he upbraids the Mitylenians for having chosen Pittacus for
their tyrant, and with one [1285b] voice extolling him to the skies who
was the ruin of a rash and devoted people. These sorts of government
then are, and ever were, despotic, on account of their being tyrannies;
but inasmuch as they are elective, and over a free people, they are also
kingly.

A fourth species of kingly government is that which was in use in the
heroic times, when a free people submitted to a kingly government,
according to the laws and customs of their country. For those who were
at first of benefit to mankind, either in arts or arms, or by collecting
them into civil society, or procuring them an establishment, became the
kings of a willing people, and established an hereditary monarchy.
They were particularly their generals in war, and presided over their
sacrifices, excepting such only as belonged to the priests: they were
also the supreme judges over the people; and in this case some of them
took an oath, others did not; they did, the form of swearing was by
their sceptre held out.

In ancient times the power of the kings extended to everything
whatsoever, both civil, domestic, and foreign; but in after-times they
relinquished some of their privileges, and others the people assumed, so
that, in some states, they left their kings only the right of presiding
over the sacrifices; and even those whom it were worth while to call
by that name had only the right of being commander-in-chief in their
foreign wars.

These, then, are the four sorts of kingdoms: the first is that of the
heroic times; which was a government over a free people, with its rights
in some particulars marked out; for the king was their general, their
judge, and their high priest. The second, that of the barbarians; which
is an hereditary despotic government regulated by laws: the third is
that which they call aesumnetic, which is an elective tyranny. The
fourth is the Lacedaemonian; and this, in few words, is nothing more
than an hereditary generalship: and in these particulars they differ
from each other. There is a fifth species of kingly government, which is
when one person has a supreme power over all things whatsoever, in
the manner that every state and every city has over those things which
belong to the public: for as the master of a family is king in his own
house, so such a king is master of a family in his own city or state.




CHAPTER XV


But the different sorts of kingly governments may, if I may so say,
be reduced to two; which we will consider more particularly. The last
spoken of, and the Lacedaemonian, for the chief of the others are placed
between these, which are as it were at the extremities, they having less
power than an absolute government, and yet more than the Lacedaemonians;
so that the whole matter in question may be reduced to these two points;
the one is, whether it is advantageous to the citizens to have the
office of general continue in one person for life, and whether it should
be confined to any particular families or whether every one should be
eligible: the other, whether [1286a] it is advantageous for one person
to have the supreme power over everything or not. But to enter into the
particulars concerning the office of a Lacedaemonian general would be
rather to frame laws for a state than to consider the nature and utility
of its constitution, since we know that the appointing of a general is
what is done in every state. Passing over this question then, we will
proceed to consider the other part of their government, which is
the polity of the state; and this it will be necessary to examine
particularly into, and to go through such questions as may arise.

Now the first thing which presents itself to our consideration is this,
whether it is best to be governed by a good man, or by good laws? Those
who prefer a kingly government think that laws can only speak a general
language, but cannot adapt themselves to particular circumstances; for
which reason it is absurd in any science to follow written rule; and
even in Egypt the physician was allowed to alter the mode of cure which
the law prescribed to him, after the fourth day; but if he did it sooner
it was at his own peril: from whence it is evident, on the very same
account, that a government of written laws is not the best; and yet
general reasoning is necessary to all those who are to govern, and it
will be much more perfect in those who are entirely free from passions
than in those to whom they are natural. But now this is a quality which
laws possess; while the other is natural to the human soul. But some
one will say in answer to this, that man will be a better judge of
particulars. It will be necessary, then, for a king to be a lawgiver,
and that his laws should be published, but that those should have no
authority which are absurd, as those which are not, should. But whether
is it better for the community that those things which cannot possibly
come under the cognisance of the law either at all or properly should be
under the government of every worthy citizen, as the present method is,
when the public community, in their general assemblies, act as judges
and counsellors, where all their determinations are upon particular
cases, for one individual, be he who he will, will be found, upon
comparison, inferior to a whole people taken collectively: but this
is what a city is, as a public entertainment is better than one man's
portion: for this reason the multitude judge of many things better than
any one single person. They are also less liable to corruption from
their numbers, as water is from its quantity: besides, the judgment of
an individual must necessarily be perverted if he is overcome by anger
or any other passion; but it would be hard indeed if the whole community
should be misled by anger. Moreover, let the people be free, and they
will do nothing but in conformity to the law, except only in those cases
which the law cannot speak to. But though what I am going to propose may
not easily be met with, yet if the majority of the state should happen
to be good men, should they prefer one uncorrupt governor or many
equally good, is it not evident that they should choose the many? But
there may be divisions among [1286b] these which cannot happen when
there is but one. In answer to this it may be replied that all their
souls will be as much animated with virtue as this one man's.

If then a government of many, and all of them good men, compose an
aristocracy, and the government of one a kingly power, it is evident
that the people should rather choose the first than the last; and this
whether the state is powerful or not, if many such persons so alike
can be met with: and for this reason probable it was, that the first
governments were generally monarchies; because it was difficult to find
a number of persons eminently virtuous, more particularly as the world
was then divided into small communities; besides, kings were appointed
in return for the benefits they had conferred on mankind; but such
actions are peculiar to good men: but when many persons equal in virtue
appeared at the time, they brooked not a superiority, but sought after
an equality and established a free state; but after this, when they
degenerated, they made a property of the public; which probably gave
rise to oligarchies; for they made wealth meritorious, and the honours
of government were reserved for the rich: and these afterwards turned
to tyrannies and these in their turn gave rise to democracies; for
the power of the tyrants continually decreasing, on account of their
rapacious avarice, the people grew powerful enough to frame and
establish democracies: and as cities after that happened to increase,
probably it was not easy for them to be under any other government than
a democracy. But if any person prefers a kingly government in a state,
what is to be done with the king's children? Is the family also to
reign? But should they have such children as some persons usually have,
it will be very detrimental. It may be said, that then the king who
has it in his power will never permit such children to succeed to his
kingdom. But it is not easy to trust to that; for it is very hard and
requires greater virtue than is to be met with in human nature. There is
also a doubt concerning the power with which a king should be entrusted:
whether he should be allowed force sufficient to compel those who do
not choose to be obedient to the laws, and how he is to support his
government? for if he is to govern according to law and do nothing of
his own will which is contrary thereunto, at the same time it will
be necessary to protect that power with which he guards the law, This
matter however may not be very difficult to determine; for he ought to
have a proper power, and such a one is that which will be sufficient
to make the king superior to any one person or even a large part of the
community, but inferior to the whole, as the ancients always appointed
guards for that person whom they created aesumnetes or tyrant; and some
one advised the Syracusians, when Dionysius asked for guards, to allow
him such.




CHAPTER XVI


[1287a] We will next consider the absolute monarch that we have just
mentioned, who does everything according to his own will: for a king
governing under the direction of laws which he is obliged to follow does
not of himself create any particular species of government, as we have
already said: for in every state whatsoever, either aristocracy or
democracy, it is easy to appoint a general for life; and there are many
who entrust the administration of affairs to one person only; such is
the government at Dyrrachium, and nearly the same at Opus. As for an
absolute monarchy as it is called, that is to say, when the whole state
is wholly subject to the will of one person, namely the king, it seems
to many that it is unnatural that one man should have the entire rule
over his fellow-citizens when the state consists of equals: for nature
requires that the same right and the same rank should necessarily take
place amongst all those who are equal by nature: for as it would be
hurtful to the body for those who are of different constitutions to
observe the same regimen, either of diet or clothing, so is it with
respect to the honours of the state as hurtful, that those who are equal
in merit should be unequal in rank; for which reason it is as much
a man's duty to submit to command as to assume it, and this also by
rotation; for this is law, for order is law; and it is more proper that
law should govern than any one of the citizens: upon the same principle,
if it is advantageous to place the supreme power in some particular
persons, they should be appointed to be only guardians, and the servants
of the laws, for the supreme power must be placed somewhere; but they
say, that it is unjust that where all are equal one person should
continually enjoy it. But it seems unlikely that man should be able to
adjust that which the law cannot determine; it may be replied, that the
law having laid down the best rules possible, leaves the adjustment and
application of particulars to the discretion of the magistrate; besides,
it allows anything to be altered which experience proves may be better
established. Moreover, he who would place the supreme power in mind,
would place it in God and the laws; but he who entrusts man with it,
gives it to a wild beast, for such his appetites sometimes make him; for
passion influences those who are in power, even the very best of men:
for which reason law is reason without desire.

The instance taken from the arts seems fallacious: wherein it is said to
be wrong for a sick person to apply for a remedy to books, but that it
would be far more eligible to employ those who are skilful in physic;
for these do nothing contrary to reason from motives of friendship
but earn their money by curing the sick, whereas those who have the
management of public affairs do many things through hatred or favour.
And, as a proof of what we have advanced, it may be observed, that
whenever a sick person suspects that his physician has been persuaded by
his enemies to be guilty of any foul practice to him in his profession,
he then rather chooses to apply to books for his cure: and not only this
[1287b] but even physicians themselves when they are ill call in other
physicians: and those who teach others the gymnastic exercises,
exercise with those of the same profession, as being incapable from
self-partiality to form a proper judgment of what concerns themselves.
From whence it is evident, that those who seek for what is just, seek
for a mean; now law is a mean. Moreover; the moral law is far superior
and conversant with far superior objects than the written law; for the
supreme magistrate is safer to be trusted to than the one, though he is
inferior to the other. But as it is impossible that one person should
have an eye to everything himself, it will be necessary that the supreme
magistrate should employ several subordinate ones under him; why then
should not this be done at first, instead of appointing one person in
this manner? Besides, if, according to what has been already said, the
man of worth is on that account fit to govern, two men of worth are
certainly better than one: as, for instance, in Homer, "Let two together
go:" and also Agamemnon's wish; "Were ten such faithful counsel mine!"
Not but that there are even now some particular magistrates invested
with supreme power to decide, as judges, those things which the law
cannot, as being one of those cases which comes not properly under its
jurisdiction; for of those which can there is no doubt: since then laws
comprehend some things, but not all, it is necessary to enquire and
consider which of the two is preferable, that the best man or the best
law should govern; for to reduce every subject which can come under the
deliberation of man into a law is impossible.

No one then denies, that it is necessary that there should be some
person to decide those cases which cannot come under the cognisance of
a written law: but we say, that it is better to have many than one;
for though every one who decides according to the principles of the law
decides justly; yet surely it seems absurd to suppose, that one person
can see better with two eyes, and hear better with two ears, or do
better with two hands and two feet, than many can do with many: for we
see that absolute monarchs now furnish themselves with many eyes and
ears and hands and feet; for they entrust those who are friends to
them and their government with part of their power; for if they are not
friends to the monarch, they will not do what he chooses; but if they
are friends to him, they are friends also to his government: but a
friend is an equal and like his friend: if then he thinks that such
should govern, he thinks that his equal also should govern. These are
nearly the objections which are usually made to a kingly power.




CHAPTER XVII


Probably what we have said may be true of some persons, but not of
others; for some men are by nature formed to be under the government of
a master; others, of a king; others, to be the citizens of a free state,
just and useful; but a tyranny is not according to nature, nor the other
perverted forms of government; for they are contrary to it. But it
is evident from what has been said, that among equals it is neither
advantageous nor [1288a] right that one person should be lord over all
where there are no established laws, but his will is the law; or where
there are; nor is it right that one who is good should have it over
those who are good; or one who is not good over those who are not good;
nor one who is superior to the rest in worth, except in a particular
manner, which shall be described, though indeed it has been already
mentioned. But let us next determine what people are best qualified
for a kingly government, what for an aristocratic, and what for a
democratic. And, first, for a kingly; and it should be those who are
accustomed by nature to submit the civil government of themselves to a
family eminent for virtue: for an aristocracy, those who are naturally
framed to bear the rule of free men, whose superior virtue makes them
worthy of the management of others: for a free state, a war-like people,
formed by nature both to govern and be governed by laws which admit the
poorest citizen to share the honours of the commonwealth according
to his worth. But whenever a whole family or any one of another shall
happen so far to excel in virtue as to exceed all other persons in the
community, then it is right that the kingly power should be in them, or
if it is an individual who does so, that he should be king and lord of
all; for this, as we have just mentioned, is not only correspondent
to that principle of right which all founders of all states, whether
aristocracies, oligarchies, or democracies, have a regard to (for
in placing the supreme power they all think it right to fix it to
excellence, though not the same); but it is also agreeable to what
has been already said; as it would not be right to kill, or banish, or
ostracise such a one for his superior merit. Nor would it be proper
to let him have the supreme power only in turn; for it is contrary to
nature that what is highest should ever be lowest: but this would be
the case should such a one ever be governed by others. So that there can
nothing else be done but to submit, and permit him continually to
enjoy the supreme power. And thus much with respect to kingly power in
different states, and whether it is or is not advantageous to them, and
to what, and in what manner.




CHAPTER XVIII


Since then we have said that there are three sorts of regular
governments, and of these the best must necessarily be that which is
administered by the best men (and this must be that which happens to
have one man, or one family, or a number of persons excelling all the
rest in virtue, who are able to govern and be governed in such a manner
as will make life most agreeable, and we have already shown that the
virtue of a good man and of a citizen in the most perfect government
will be the same), it is evident, that in the same manner, and for those
very qualities which would procure a man the character of good, any
one would say, that the government of a state was a well-established
aristocracy or kingdom; so that it will be found to be education and
[1288b] morals that are almost the whole which go to make a good man,
and the same qualities will make a good citizen or good king.

These particulars being treated of, we will now proceed to consider
what sort of government is best, how it naturally arises, and how it
is established; for it is necessary to make a proper inquiry concerning
this.




BOOK IV




CHAPTER I


In every art and science which is not conversant in parts but in some
one genus in which it is complete, it is the business of that art alone
to determine what is fitted to its particular genus; as what particular
exercise is fitted to a certain particular body, and suits it best: for
that body which is formed by nature the most perfect and superior to
others necessarily requires the best exercise-and also of what one kind
that must be which will suit the generality; and this is the business of
the gymnastic arts: and although any one should not desire to acquire
an exact knowledge and skill in these exercises, yet it is not, on that
account, the less necessary that he who professes to be a master and
instruct the youth in them should be perfect therein: and we see that
this is what equally befalls the healing, shipbuilding, cloth-making,
and indeed all other arts; so that it evidently belongs to the same art
to find out what kind of government is best, and would of all others be
most correspondent to our wish, while it received no molestation from
without: and what particular species of it is adapted to particular
persons; for there are many who probably are incapable of enjoying the
best form: so that the legislator, and he who is truly a politician,
ought to be acquainted not only with that which is most perfect
imaginable, but also that which is the best suited to any given
circumstances. There is, moreover, a third sort, an imaginary one, and
he ought, if such a one should be presented to his consideration, to be
able to discern what sort of one it would be at the beginning; and, when
once established, what would be the proper means to preserve it a long
time. I mean, for instance, if a state should happen not to have the
best form of government, or be deficient in what was necessary, or not
receive every advantage possible, but something less. And, besides all
this, it is necessary to know what sort of government is best fitting
for all cities: for most of those writers who have treated this subject,
however speciously they may handle other parts of it, have failed in
describing the practical parts: for it is not enough to be able to
perceive what is best without it is what can be put in practice. It
should also be simple, and easy for all to attain to. But some seek only
the most subtile forms of government. Others again, choosing [1289a]
rather to treat of what is common, censure those under which they live,
and extol the excellence of a particular state, as the Lacedaemonian,
or some other: but every legislator ought to establish such a form of
government as from the present state and disposition of the people who
are to receive it they will most readily submit to and persuade the
community to partake of: for it is not a business of less trouble to
correct the mistakes of an established government than to form a new
one; as it is as difficult to recover what we have forgot as to learn
anything afresh. He, therefore, who aspires to the character of a
legislator, ought, besides all we have already said, to be able to
correct the mistakes of a government already established, as we have
before mentioned. But this is impossible to be done by him who does
not know how many different forms of government there are: some persons
think that there is only one species both of democracy and oligarchy;
but this is not true: so that every one should be acquainted with the
difference of these governments, how great they are, and whence they
arise; and should have equal knowledge to perceive what laws are best,
and what are most suitable to each particular government: for all
laws are, and ought to be, framed agreeable to the state that is to be
governed by them, and not the state to the laws: for government is a
certain ordering in a state which particularly respects the magistrates
in what manner they shall be regulated, and where the supreme power
shall be placed; and what shall be the final object which each community
shall have in view; but the laws are something different from what
regulates and expresses the form of the constitution-it is their office
to direct the conduct of the magistrate in the execution of his office
and the punishment of offenders. From whence it is evident, that the
founders of laws should attend both to the number and the different
sorts of government; for it is impossible that the same laws should be
calculated for all sorts of oligarchies and all sorts of democracies,
for of both these governments there are many species, not one only.




CHAPTER II


Since, then, according to our first method in treating of the different
forms of government, we have divided those which are regular into three
sorts, the kingly, the aristocratical, the free states, and shown
the three excesses which these are liable to: the kingly, of becoming
tyrannical; the aristocratical, oligarchical; and the free state,
democratical: and as we have already treated of the aristocratical and
kingly; for to enter into an inquiry what sort of government is best
is the same thing as to treat of these two expressly; for each of
them desires to be established upon the principles of virtue: and as,
moreover, we have already determined wherein a kingly power and an
aristocracy differ from each other, and when a state may be said to be
governed by a king, it now remains that we examine into a free state,
and also these other governments, an oligarchy, a democracy, and a
[1289b] tyranny; and it is evident of these three excesses which must be
the worst of all, and which next to it; for, of course, the excesses of
the best and most holy must be the worst; for it must necessarily happen
either that the name of king only will remain, or else that the king
will assume more power than belongs to him, from whence tyranny will
arise, the worst excess imaginable, a government the most contrary
possible to a free state. The excess next hurtful is an oligarchy; for
an aristocracy differs much from this sort of government: that which is
least so is a democracy. This subject has been already treated of by one
of those writers who have gone before me, though his sentiments are not
the same as mine: for he thought, that of all excellent constitutions,
as a good oligarchy or the like, a democracy was the worst, but of all
bad ones, the best.

Now I affirm, that all these states have, without exception, fallen into
excess; and also that he should not have said that one oligarchy was
better than another, but that it was not quite so bad. But this question
we shall not enter into at present. We shall first inquire how many
different sorts of free states there are; since there are many
species of democracies and oligarchies; and which of them is the most
comprehensive, and most desirable after the best form of government; or
if there is any other like an aristocracy, well established; and also
which of these is best adapted to most cities, and which of them is
preferable for particular persons: for, probably, some may suit better
with an oligarchy than a democracy, and others better with a democracy
than an oligarchy; and afterwards in what manner any one ought to
proceed who desires to establish either of these states, I mean every
species of democracy, and also of oligarchy. And to conclude, when we
shall have briefly gone through everything that is necessary, we will
endeavour to point out the sources of corruption, and stability, in
government, as well those which are common to all as those which are
peculiar to each state, and from what causes they chiefly arise.




CHAPTER III


The reason for there being many different sorts of governments is this,
that each state consists of a great number of parts; for, in the first
place, we see that all cities are made up of families: and again, of
the multitude of these some must be rich, some poor, and others in the
middle station; and that, both of the rich and poor, some will be used
to arms, others not. We see also, that some of the common people are
husbandmen, others attend the market, and others are artificers. There
is also a difference between the nobles in their wealth, and the dignity
in which they live: for instance, in the number of horses they breed;
for this cannot be supported without a large fortune: for which reason,
in former times, those cities whose strength consisted in horse became
by that means oligarchies; and they used horse in their expeditions
against the neighbouring cities; as the Eretrians the Chalcidians, the
Magnetians, who lived near the river Meander, and many others in Asia.
Moreover, besides the difference of fortune, there is that which arises
from family and merit; or, if there are any other distinctions [1290a]
which make part of the city, they have been already mentioned in
treating of an aristocracy, for there we considered how many parts each
city must necessarily be composed of; and sometimes each of these have a
share in the government, sometimes a few, sometimes more.

It is evident then, that there must be many forms of government,
differing from each other in their particular constitution: for the
parts of which they are composed each differ from the other. For
government is the ordering of the magistracies of the state; and these
the community share between themselves, either as they can attain them
by force, or according to some common equality which there is amongst
them, as poverty, wealth, or something which they both partake of. There
must therefore necessarily be as many different forms of governments as
there are different ranks in the society, arising from the superiority
of some over others, and their different situations. And these seem
chiefly to be two, as they say, of the winds: namely, the north and
the south; and all the others are declinations from these. And thus in
politics, there is the government of the many and the government of
the few; or a democracy and an oligarchy: for an aristocracy may be
considered as a species of oligarchy, as being also a government of the
few; and what we call a free state may be considered as a democracy: as
in the winds they consider the west as part of the north, and the east
as part of the south: and thus it is in music, according to some, who
say there are only two species of it, the Doric and the Phrygian, and
all other species of composition they call after one of these names; and
many people are accustomed to consider the nature of government in the
same light; but it is both more convenient and more correspondent to
truth to distinguish governments as I have done, into two species: one,
of those which are established upon proper principles; of which there
may be one or two sorts: the other, which includes all the different
excesses of these; so that we may compare the best form of government to
the most harmonious piece of music; the oligarchic and despotic to the
more violent tunes; and the democratic to the soft and gentle airs.




CHAPTER IV


We ought not to define a democracy as some do, who say simply, that it
is a government where the supreme power is lodged in the people; for
even in oligarchies the supreme power is in the majority. Nor should
they define an oligarchy a government where the supreme power is in the
hands of a few: for let us suppose the number of a people to be thirteen
hundred, and that of these one thousand were rich, who would not permit
the three hundred poor to have any share in the government, although
they were free, and their equal in everything else; no one would say,
that this government was a democracy. In like manner, if the poor, when
few in number, should acquire the power over the rich, though more than
themselves, no one would say, that this was an oligarchy; nor this, when
the rest who are rich have no share in the administration. We should
rather say, that a democracy is when the supreme power is in the [1290b]
hands of the freemen; an oligarchy, when it is in the hands of the rich:
it happens indeed that in the one case the many will possess it, in
the other the few; because there are many poor and few rich. And if the
power of the state was to be distributed according to the size of the
citizens, as they say it is in Ethiopia, or according to their beauty,
it would be an oligarchy: for the number of those who are large and
beautiful is small.

Nor are those things which we have already mentioned alone sufficient
to describe these states; for since there are many species both of a
democracy and an oligarchy, the matter requires further consideration;
as we cannot admit, that if a few persons who are free possess the
supreme power over the many who are not free, that this government is a
democracy: as in Apollonia, in Ionia, and in Thera: for in each of these
cities the honours of the state belong to some few particular families,
who first founded the colonies. Nor would the rich, because they are
superior in numbers, form a democracy, as formerly at Colophon; for
there the majority had large possessions before the Lydian war: but a
democracy is a state where the freemen and the poor, being the majority,
are invested with the power of the state. An oligarchy is a state where
the rich and those of noble families, being few, possess it.

We have now proved that there are various forms of government and have
assigned a reason for it; and shall proceed to show that there are
even more than these, and what they are, and why; setting out with the
principle we have already laid down. We admit that every city consists
not of one, but many parts: thus, if we should endeavour to comprehend
the different species of animals we should first of all note those parts
which every animal must have, as a certain sensorium, and also what is
necessary to acquire and retain food, as a mouth and a belly; besides
certain parts to enable it to move from place to place. If, then, these
are the only parts of an animal and there are differences between them;
namely, in their various sorts of stomachs, bellies, and sensoriums: to
which we must add their motive powers; the number of the combinations of
all these must necessarily make up the different species of animals.
For it is not possible that the same kind of animal should have any
very great difference in its mouth or ears; so that when all these are
collected, who happen to have these things similar in all, they make up
a species of animals of which there are as many as there are of these
general combinations of necessary parts.

The same thing is true of what are called states; for a city is not made
of one but many parts, as has already been often said; one of which is
those who supply it with provisions, called husbandmen, another called
mechanics, [1291a] whose employment is in the manual arts, without which
the city could not be inhabited; of these some are busied about what is
absolutely necessary, others in what contribute to the elegancies and
pleasures of life; the third sort are your exchange-men, I mean by these
your buyers, sellers, merchants, and victuallers; the fourth are your
hired labourers or workmen; the fifth are the men-at-arms, a rank not
less useful than the other, without you would have the community slaves
to every invader; but what cannot defend itself is unworthy of the name
of a city; for a city is self-sufficient, a slave not. So that when
Socrates, in Plato's Republic, says that a city is necessarily composed
of four sorts of people, he speaks elegantly but not correctly, and
these are, according to him, weavers, husbandmen, shoe-makers, and
builders; he then adds, as if these were not sufficient, smiths,
herdsmen for what cattle are necessary, and also merchants and
victuallers, and these are by way of appendix to his first list; as if
a city was established for necessity, and not happiness, or as if a
shoe-maker and a husbandman were equally useful. He reckons not the
military a part before the increase of territory and joining to the
borders of the neighbouring powers will make war necessary: and even
amongst them who compose his four divisions, or whoever have any
connection with each other, it will be necessary to have some one to
distribute justice, and determine between man and man. If, then, the
mind is a more valuable part of man than the body, every one would
wish to have those things more regarded in his city which tend to the
advantage of these than common matters, such are war and justice; to
which may be added council, which is the business of civil wisdom (nor
is it of any consequence whether these different employments are filled
by different persons or one, as the same man is oftentimes both a
soldier and a husbandman): so that if both the judge and the senator are
parts of the city, it necessarily follows that the soldier must be
so also. The seventh sort are those who serve the public in expensive
employments at their own charge: these are called the rich. The eighth
are those who execute the different offices of the state, and without
these it could not possibly subsist: it is therefore necessary that
there should be some persons capable of governing and filling the places
in the city; and this either for life or in rotation: the office of
senator, and judge, of which we have already sufficiently treated, are
the only ones remaining. If, then, these things are necessary for a
state, that it may be happy and just, it follows that the citizens who
engage in public affairs should be men of abilities therein. [1291b]
Several persons think, that different employments may be allotted to the
same person; as a soldier's, a husbandman's, and an artificer's; as also
that others may be both senators and judges.

Besides, every one supposes himself a man of political abilities, and
that he is qualified for almost every department in the state. But the
same person cannot at once be poor and rich: for which reason the most
obvious division of the city is into two parts, the poor and rich;
moreover, since for the generality the one are few, the other many, they
seem of all the parts of a city most contrary to each other; so that as
the one or the other prevail they form different states; and these are
the democracy and the oligarchy.

But that there are many different states, and from what causes they
arise, has been already mentioned: and that there are also different
species both of democracies and oligarchies we will now show. Though
this indeed is evident from what we have already said: there are also
many different sorts of common people, and also of those who are
called gentlemen. Of the different sorts of the first are husbandmen,
artificers, exchange-men, who are employed in buying and selling,
seamen, of which some are engaged in war, some in traffic, some in
carrying goods and passengers from place to place, others in fishing,
and of each of these there are often many, as fishermen at Tarentum and
Byzantium, masters of galleys at Athens, merchants at AEgina and Chios,
those who let ships on freight at Tenedos; we may add to these those who
live by their manual labour and have but little property; so that they
cannot live without some employ: and also those who are not free-born
on both sides, and whatever other sort of common people there may be.
As for gentlemen, they are such as are distinguished either by their
fortune, their birth, their abilities, or their education, or any
such-like excellence which is attributed to them.

The most pure democracy is that which is so called principally from that
equality which prevails in it: for this is what the law in that state
directs; that the poor shall be in no greater subjection than the rich;
nor that the supreme power shall be lodged with either of these, but
that both shall share it. For if liberty and equality, as some persons
suppose, are chiefly to be found in a democracy, it must be most so
by every department of government being alike open to all; but as the
people are the majority, and what they vote is law, it follows that such
a state must be a democracy. This, then, is one species thereof. Another
is, when the magistrates are elected by a certain census; but this
should be but small, and every one who was included in it should be
eligible, but as soon as he was below it should lose that right. [1292a]
Another sort is, in which every citizen who is not infamous has a share
in the government, but where the government is in the laws. Another,
where every citizen without exception has this right. Another is like
these in other particulars, but there the people govern, and not the
law: and this takes place when everything is determined by a majority of
votes, and not by a law; which happens when the people are influenced by
the demagogues: for where a democracy is governed by stated laws there
is no room for them, but men of worth fill the first offices in the
state: but where the power is not vested in the laws, there demagogues
abound: for there the people rule with kingly power: the whole composing
one body; for they are supreme, not as individuals but in their
collective capacity.

Homer also discommends the government of many; but whether he means this
we are speaking of, or where each person exercises his power separately,
is uncertain. When the people possess this power they desire to be
altogether absolute, that they may not be under the control of the law,
and this is the time when flatterers are held in repute. Nor is there
any difference between such a people and monarchs in a tyranny: for
their manners are the same, and they both hold a despotic power over
better persons than themselves. For their decrees are like the others'
edicts; their demagogues like the others' flatterers: but their greatest
resemblance consists in the mutual support they give to each other, the
flatterer to the tyrant, the demagogue to the people: and to them it is
owing that the supreme power is lodged in the votes of the people,
and not in the laws; for they bring everything before them, as their
influence is owing to their being supreme whose opinions they entirely
direct; for these are they whom the multitude obey. Besides, those who
accuse the magistrates insist upon it, that the right of determining on
their conduct lies in the people, who gladly receive their complaints as
the means of destroying all their offices.

Any one, therefore, may with great justice blame such a government as
being a democracy, and not a free state; for where the government is
not in the laws, then there is no free state, for the law ought to be
supreme over all things; and particular incidents which arise should be
determined by the magistrates or the state. If, therefore, a
democracy is to be reckoned a free state, it is evident that any such
establishment which centres all power in the votes of the people cannot,
properly speaking, be a democracy: for their decrees cannot be general
in their extent. Thus, then, we may describe the several species of
democracies.




CHAPTER V


Of the different species of oligarchies one is, when the right to the
offices is regulated by a certain census; so that the poor, although the
majority, have no share in it; while all those who are included therein
take part in the management of public affairs. Another sort is, when
[1292b] the magistrates are men of very small fortune, who upon any
vacancy do themselves fill it up: and if they do this out of the
community at large, the state approaches to an aristocracy; if out of
any particular class of people, it will be an oligarchy. Another sort of
oligarchy is, when the power is an hereditary nobility. The fourth is,
when the power is in the same hands as the other, but not under the
control of law; and this sort of oligarchy exactly corresponds to a
tyranny in monarchies, and to that particular species of democracies
which I last mentioned in treating of that state: this has the
particular name of a dynasty. These are the different sorts of
oligarchies and democracies.

It should also be known, that it often happens that a free state, where
the supreme power is in the laws, may not be democratic, and yet in
consequence of the established manners and customs of the people, may
be governed as if it was; so, on the other hand, where the laws may
countenance a more democratic form of government, these may make the
state inclining to an oligarchy; and this chiefly happens when there
has been any alteration in the government; for the people do not easily
change, but love their own ancient customs; and it is by small degrees
only that one thing takes place of another; so that the ancient laws
will remain, while the power will be in the hands of those who have
brought about a revolution in the state.




CHAPTER VI


It is evident from what has been said, that there are as many different
sorts of democracies and oligarchies as I have reckoned up: for, of
necessity, either all ranks of the people which I have enumerated must
have a share in the government, or some only, and others not; for when
the husbandmen, and those only who possess moderate fortunes, have the
supreme power, they will govern according to law; for as they must get
their livings by their employs, they have but little leisure for public
business: they will therefore establish proper laws, and never call
public assemblies but when there is a necessity for them; and they will
readily let every one partake with them in the administration of public
affairs as soon as they possess that fortune which the law requires for
their qualification: every one, therefore, who is qualified will have
his share in the government: for to exclude any would be to make the
government an oligarchy, and for all to have leisure to attend
without they had a subsistence would be impossible: for these reasons,
therefore, this government is a species of democracy. Another species is
distinguished by the mode of electing their magistrates, in which every
one is eligible, to whose birth there are no objections, provided he is
supposed to have leisure to attend: for which reason in such a democracy
the supreme power will be vested in the laws, as there will be nothing
paid to those who go to the public assemblies. A third species is where
every freeman has a right to a share in the government, which he will
not accept for the cause already assigned; for which reason here also
the supreme power will be in the law. The fourth species [1293a] of
democracy, the last which was established in order of time, arose when
cities were greatly enlarged to what they were at first, and when the
public revenue became something considerable; for then the populace, on
account of their numbers, were admitted to share in the management of
public affairs, for then even the poorest people were at leisure to
attend to them, as they received wages for so doing; nay, they were more
so than others, as they were not hindered by having anything of their
own to mind, as the rich had; for which reason these last very often did
not frequent the public assemblies and the courts of justice: thus the
supreme power was lodged in the poor, and not in the laws. These are
the different sorts of democracies, and such are the causes which
necessarily gave birth to them.

The first species of oligarchy is, when the generality of the state are
men of moderate and not too large property; for this gives them leisure
for the management of public affairs: and, as they are a numerous body,
it necessarily follows that the supreme power must be in the laws, and
not in men; for as they are far removed from a monarchical government,
and have not sufficient fortune to neglect their private affairs, while
they are too many to be supported by the public, they will of course
determine to be governed by the laws, and not by each other. But if the
men of property in the state are but few, and their property is large,
then an oligarchy of the second sort will take place; for those who have
most power will think that they have a right to lord it over the others;
and, to accomplish this, they will associate to themselves some who have
an inclination for public affairs, and as they are not powerful enough
to govern without law, they will make a law for that purpose. And if
those few who have large fortunes should acquire still greater power,
the oligarchy will then alter into one of the third sort; for they will
get all the offices of the state into their own hands by a law which
directs the son to succeed upon the death of his father; and,
after that, when, by means of their increasing wealth and powerful
connections, they extend still further their oppression, a monarchical
dynasty will directly succeed wherein men will be supreme, and not the
law; and this is the fourth species of an oligarchy correspondent to the
last-mentioned class of democracies.




CHAPTER VII


There are besides two other states, a democracy and an oligarchy, one
of which all speak of, and it is always esteemed a species of the
four sorts; and thus they reckon them up; a monarchy, an oligarchy, a
democracy, and this fourth which they call an aristocracy. There is
also a fifth, which bears a name that is also common to the other four,
namely, a state: but as this is seldom to be met with, it has escaped
those who have endeavoured to enumerate the different sorts of
governments, which [1293b] they fix at four only, as does Plato in his
Republic.

An aristocracy, of which I have already treated in the first book, is
rightly called so; for a state governed by the best men, upon the most
virtuous principles, and not upon any hypothesis, which even good men
may propose, has alone a right to be called an aristocracy, for it is
there only that a man is at once a good man and a good citizen; while in
other states men are good only relative to those states. Moreover, there
are some other states which are called by the same name, that differ
both from oligarchies and free states, wherein not only the rich but
also the virtuous have a share in the administration; and have therefore
acquired the name of aristocracies; for in those governments wherein
virtue is not their common care, there are still men of worth and
approved goodness. Whatever state, then, like the Carthaginians,
favours the rich, the virtuous, and the citizens at large, is a sort
of aristocracy: when only the two latter are held in esteem, as at
Lacedaemon, and the state is jointly composed of these, it is a virtuous
democracy. These are the two species of aristocracies after the first,
which is the best of all governments. There is also a third, which is,
whenever a free state inclines to the dominion of a few.




CHAPTER VIII


It now remains for us to treat of that government which is particularly
called a free state, and also of a tyranny; and the reason for my
choosing to place that free state here is, because this, as well
as those aristocracies already mentioned, although they do not seem
excesses, yet, to speak true, they have all departed from what a perfect
government is. Nay, they are deviations both of them equally from other
forms, as I said at the beginning. It is proper to mention a tyranny the
last of all governments, for it is of all others the least like one:
but as my intention is to treat of all governments in general, for this
reason that also, as I have said, will be taken into consideration in
its proper place.

I shall now inquire into a free state and show what it is; and we shall
the better understand its positive nature as we have already described
an oligarchy and a democracy; for a free state is indeed nothing more
than a mixture of them, and it has been usual to call those which
incline most to a democracy, a free state; those which incline most to
an oligarchy, an aristocracy, because those who are rich are generally
men of family and education; besides, they enjoy those things which
others are often guilty of crimes to procure: for which reason they are
regarded as men of worth and honour and note.

Since, then, it is the genius of an aristocracy to allot the larger
part of the government to the best citizens, they therefore say, that
an oligarchy is chiefly composed of those men who are worthy and
honourable: now it [1294a] seems impossible that where the government
is in the hands of the good, there the laws should not be good, but bad;
or, on the contrary, that where the government is in the hands of the
bad, there the laws should be good; nor is a government well constituted
because the laws are, without at the same time care is taken that they
are observed; for to enforce obedience to the laws which it makes is one
proof of a good constitution in the state-another is, to have laws well
calculated for those who are to abide by them; for if they are improper
they must be obeyed: and this may be done two ways, either by their
being the best relative to the particular state, or the best absolutely.
An aristocracy seems most likely to confer the honours of the state on
the virtuous; for virtue is the object of an aristocracy, riches of an
oligarchy, and liberty of a democracy; for what is approved of by the
majority will prevail in all or in each of these three different states;
and that which seems good to most of those who compose the community
will prevail: for what is called a state prevails in many communities,
which aim at a mixture of rich and poor, riches and liberty: as for
the rich, they are usually supposed to take the place of the worthy and
honourable. As there are three things which claim an equal rank in the
state, freedom, riches, and virtue (for as for the fourth, rank, it is
an attendant on two of the others, for virtue and riches are the origin
of family), it is evident, that the conjuncture of the rich and the poor
make up a free state; but that all three tend to an aristocracy more
than any other, except that which is truly so, which holds the first
rank.

We have already seen that there are governments different from a
monarchy, a democracy, and an oligarchy; and what they are, and wherein
they differ from each other; and also aristocracies and states properly
so called, which are derived from them; and it is evident that these are
not much unlike each other.




CHAPTER IX


We shall next proceed to show how that government which is peculiarly
called a state arises alongside of democracy and oligarchy, and how it
ought to be established; and this will at the same time show what are
the proper boundaries of both these governments, for we must mark out
wherein they differ from one another, and then from both these compose
a state of such parts of each of them as will show from whence they were
taken.

There are three different ways in which two states may be blended and
joined together; for, in the first place, all those rules may be adopted
which the laws of each of them have ordered; as for instance in the
judicial department, for in an oligarchy the rich are fined if they do
not come to the court as jurymen, but the poor are not paid for their
attendance; but in democracies they are, while the rich are not fined
for their neglect. Now these things, as being common to both, are fit
to be observed in a free [1294b] state which is composed of both. This,
then, is one way in which they may be joined together. In the second
place, a medium may be taken between the different methods which each
state observes; for instance, in a democracy the right to vote in the
public assembly is either confined by no census at all, or limited by a
very small one; in an oligarchy none enjoy it but those whose census is
high: therefore, as these two practices are contrary to each other, a
census between each may be established in such a state. In the third
place, different laws of each community may be adopted; as, for
instance, as it seems correspondent to the nature of a democracy, that
the magistrates should be chosen by lot, but an aristocracy by vote, and
in the one state according to a census, but not in the other: let, then,
an aristocracy and a free state copy something from each of them; let
them follow an oligarchy in choosing their magistrates by vote, but a
democracy in not admitting of any census, and thus blend together the
different customs of the two governments. But the best proof of a happy
mixture of a democracy and an oligarchy is this, when a person may
properly call the same state a democracy and an oligarchy. It is evident
that those who speak of it in this manner are induced to it because both
these governments are there well blended together: and indeed this
is common to all mediums, that the extremes of each side should be
discerned therein, as at Lacedaemon; for many affirm that it is a
democracy from the many particulars in which it follows that form of
government; as for instance, in the first place, in the bringing up of
their children, for the rich and poor are brought up in the same manner;
and their education is such that the children of the poor may partake of
it; and the same rules are observed when they are youths and men, there
is no distinction between a rich person and a poor one; and in their
public tables the same provision is served to all. The rich also wear
only such clothes as the poorest man is able to purchase. Moreover, with
respect to two magistracies of the highest rank, one they have a right
to elect to, the other to fill; namely, the senate and the ephori.
Others consider it as an oligarchy, the principles of which it follows
in many things, as in choosing all their officers by vote, and not by
lot; in there being but a few who have a right to sit in judgment on
capital causes and the like. Indeed, a state which is well composed of
two others ought to resemble them both, and neither, Such a state ought
to have its means of preservation in itself, and not without; and when I
say in itself, I do not mean that it should owe this to the forbearance
of their neighbours, for this may happen to a bad government, but to
every member of the community's not being willing that there should be
the least alteration in their constitution. Such is the method in which
a free state or aristocracy ought to be established.




CHAPTER X


It now remains to treat of a tyranny; not that there is [1295a] much
to be said on that subject, but as it makes part of our plan, since
we enumerated it amongst our different sorts of governments. In the
beginning of this work we inquired into the nature of kingly government,
and entered into a particular examination of what was most properly
called so, and whether it was advantageous to a state or not, and what
it should be, and how established; and we divided a tyranny into two
pieces when we were upon this subject, because there is something
analogous between this and a kingly government, for they are both of
them established by law; for among some of the barbarians they elect a
monarch with absolute power, and formerly among the Greeks there were
some such, whom they called sesumnetes. Now these differ from each
other; for some possess only kingly power regulated by law, and
rule those who voluntarily submit to their government; others rule
despotically according to their own will. There is a third species of
tyranny, most properly so called, which is the very opposite to kingly
power; for this is the government of one who rules over his equals and
superiors without being accountable for his conduct, and whose object is
his own advantage, and not the advantage of those he governs; for which
reason he rules by compulsion, for no freemen will ever willingly submit
to such a government. These are the different species of tyrannies,
their principles, and their causes.




CHAPTER XI


We proceed now to inquire what form of government and what manner
of life is best for communities in general, not adapting it to that
superior virtue which is above the reach of the vulgar, or that
education which every advantage of nature and fortune only can furnish,
nor to those imaginary plans which may be formed at pleasure; but to
that mode of life which the greater part of mankind can attain to,
and that government which most cities may establish: for as to those
aristocracies which we have now mentioned, they are either too perfect
for a state to support, or one so nearly alike to that state we now
going to inquire into, that we shall treat of them both as one.

The opinions which we form upon these subjects must depend upon one
common principle: for if what I have said in my treatise on Morals is
true, a happy life must arise from an uninterrupted course of virtue;
and if virtue consists in a certain medium, the middle life must
certainly be the happiest; which medium is attainable [1295b] by
every one. The boundaries of virtue and vice in the state must also
necessarily be the same as in a private person; for the form of
government is the life of the city. In every city the people are divided
into three sorts; the very rich, the very poor, and those who are
between them. If this is universally admitted, that the mean is best, it
is evident that even in point of fortune mediocrity is to be preferred;
for that state is most submissive to reason; for those who are very
handsome, or very strong, or very noble, or very rich; or, on the
contrary; those who are very poor, or very weak, or very mean, with
difficulty obey it; for the one are capricious and greatly flagitious,
the other rascally and mean, the crimes of each arising from their
different excesses: nor will they go through the different offices
of the state; which is detrimental to it: besides, those who excel in
strength, in riches, or friends, or the like, neither know how nor are
willing to submit to command: and this begins at home when they are
boys; for there they are brought up too delicately to be accustomed to
obey their preceptors: as for the very poor, their general and excessive
want of what the rich enjoy reduces them to a state too mean: so that
the one know not how to command, but to be commanded as slaves, the
others know not how to submit to any command, nor to command themselves
but with despotic power.

A city composed of such men must therefore consist of slaves and
masters, not freemen; where one party must hate, and the other
despise, where there could be no possibility of friendship or political
community: for community supposes affection; for we do not even on the
road associate with our enemies. It is also the genius of a city to be
composed as much as possible of equals; which will be most so when the
inhabitants are in the middle state: from whence it follows, that that
city must be best framed which is composed of those whom we say are
naturally its proper members. It is men of this station also who will be
best assured of safety and protection; for they will neither covet what
belongs to others, as the poor do; nor will others covet what is theirs,
as the poor do what belongs to the rich; and thus, without plotting
against any one, or having any one plot against them, they will live
free from danger: for which reason Phocylides wisely wishes for the
middle state, as being most productive of happiness. It is plain, then,
that the most perfect political community must be amongst those who are
in the middle rank, and those states are best instituted wherein these
are a larger and more respectable part, if possible, than both the
other; or, if that cannot be, at least than either of them separate;
so that being thrown into the balance it may prevent either scale from
preponderating.

It is therefore the greatest happiness which the citizens can enjoy to
possess a moderate and convenient fortune; for when some possess too
much, and others nothing at [1296a] all, the government must either be
in the hands of the meanest rabble or else a pure oligarchy; or, from
the excesses of both, a tyranny; for this arises from a headstrong
democracy or an oligarchy, but very seldom when the members of the
community are nearly on an equality with each other. We will assign a
reason for this when we come to treat of the alterations which different
states are likely to undergo. The middle state is therefore best, as
being least liable to those seditions and insurrections which disturb
the community; and for the same reason extensive governments are least
liable to these inconveniences; for there those in a middle state are
very numerous, whereas in small ones it is easy to pass to the two
extremes, so as hardly to have any in a medium remaining, but the
one half rich, the other poor: and from the same principle it is that
democracies are more firmly established and of longer continuance than
oligarchies; but even in those when there is a want of a proper number
of men of middling fortune, the poor extend their power too far, abuses
arise, and the government is soon at an end.

We ought to consider as a proof of what I now advance, that the best
lawgivers themselves were those in the middle rank of life, amongst whom
was Solon, as is evident from his poems, and Lycurgus, for he was not
a king, and Charondas, and indeed most others. What has been said will
show us why of so many free states some have changed to democracies,
others to oligarchies: for whenever the number of those in the middle
state has been too small, those who were the more numerous, whether the
rich or the poor, always overpowered them and assumed to themselves the
administration of public affairs; from hence arose either a democracy
or an oligarchy. Moreover, when in consequence of their disputes and
quarrels with each other, either the rich get the better of the poor, or
the poor of the rich, neither of them will establish a free state;
but, as the record of their victory, one which inclines to their own
principles, and form either a democracy or an oligarchy.

Those who made conquests in Greece, having all of them an eye to the
respective forms of government in their own cities, established either
democracies or oligarchies, not considering what was serviceable to the
state, but what was similar to their own; for which reason a government
has never been established where the supreme power has been placed
amongst those of the middling rank, or very seldom; and, amongst a few,
one man only of those who have yet been conquerors has been persuaded
to give the preference to this order of [1296b] men: it is indeed an
established custom with the inhabitants of most cities not to desire an
equality, but either to aspire to govern, or when they are conquered, to
submit.

Thus we have shown what the best state is, and why. It will not be
difficult to perceive of the many states which there are, for we have
seen that there are various forms both of democracies and oligarchies,
to which we should give the first place, to which the second, and in
the same manner the next also; and to observe what are the particular
excellences and defects of each, after we have first described the best
possible; for that must be the best which is nearest to this, that worst
which is most distant from the medium, without any one has a particular
plan of his own which he judges by. I mean by this, that it may happen,
that although one form of government may be better than another, yet
there is no reason to prevent another from being preferable thereunto in
particular circumstances and for particular purposes.




CHAPTER XII


After what has been said, it follows that we should now show what
particular form of government is most suitable for particular persons;
first laying this down as a general maxim, that that party which desires
to support the actual administration of the state ought always to be
superior to that which would alter it. Every city is made up of quality
and quantity: by quality I mean liberty, riches, education, and family,
and by quantity its relative populousness: now it may happen that
quality may exist in one of those parts of which the city is composed,
and quantity in another; thus the number of the ignoble may be greater
than the number of those of family, the number of the poor than that of
the rich; but not so that the quantity of the one shall overbalance the
quality of the other; those must be properly adjusted to each other; for
where the number of the poor exceeds the proportion we have mentioned,
there a democracy will rise up, and if the husbandry should have
more power than others, it will be a democracy of husbandmen; and the
democracy will be a particular species according to that class of
men which may happen to be most numerous: thus, should these be the
husbandmen, it will be of these, and the best; if of mechanics and those
who hire themselves out, the worst possible: in the same manner it may
be of any other set between these two. But when the rich and the noble
prevail more by their quality than they are deficient in quantity, there
an oligarchy ensues; and this oligarchy may be of different species,
according to the nature of the prevailing party. Every legislator in
framing his constitution ought to have a particular regard to those in
the middle rank of life; and if he intends an oligarchy, these should
be the object of his laws; if a democracy, to these they should be
entrusted; and whenever their number exceeds that of the two others, or
at least one of them, they give [1297a] stability to the constitution;
for there is no fear that the rich and the poor should agree to conspire
together against them, for neither of these will choose to serve the
other. If any one would choose to fix the administration on the widest
basis, he will find none preferable to this; for to rule by turns is
what the rich and the poor will not submit to, on account of their
hatred to each other. It is, moreover, allowed that an arbitrator is the
most proper person for both parties to trust to; now this arbitrator is
the middle rank.

Those who would establish aristocratical governments are mistaken not
only in giving too much power to the rich, but also in deceiving the
common people; for at last, instead of an imaginary good, they must feel
a real evil, for the encroachments of the rich are more destructive to
the state than those of the poor.




CHAPTER XIII


There are five particulars in which, under fair pretences, the rich
craftily endeavour to undermine the rights of the people, these are
their public assemblies, their offices of state, their courts of
justice, their military power, and their gymnastic exercises. With
respect to their public assemblies, in having them open to all, but in
fining the rich only, or others very little, for not attending; with
respect to offices, in permitting the poor to swear off, but not
granting this indulgence to those who are within the census;
with respect to their courts of justice, in fining the rich for
non-attendance, but the poor not at all, or those a great deal, and
these very little, as was done by the laws of Charondas. In some
places every citizen who was enrolled had a right to attend the public
assemblies and to try causes; which if they did not do, a very heavy
fine was laid upon them; that through fear of the fine they might avoid
being enrolled, as they were then obliged to do neither the one nor the
other. The same spirit of legislation prevailed with respect to their
bearing arms and their gymnastic exercises; for the poor are excused if
they have no arms, but the rich are fined; the same method takes place
if they do not attend their gymnastic exercises, there is no penalty on
one, but there is on the other: the consequence of which is, that the
fear of this penalty induces the rich to keep the one and attend the
other, while the poor do neither. These are the deceitful contrivances
of oligarchical legislators.

The contrary prevails in a democracy; for there they make the poor a
proper allowance for attending the assemblies and the courts, but give
the rich nothing for doing it: whence it is evident, that if any one
would properly blend these customs together, they must extend both the
pay and the fine to every member of the community, and then every one
would share in it, whereas part only now do. The citizens of a free
state ought to [1297b] consist of those only who bear arms: with respect
to their census it is not easy to determine exactly what it ought to be,
but the rule that should direct upon this subject should be to make it
as extensive as possible, so that those who are enrolled in it make up
a greater part of the people than those who are not; for those who are
poor, although they partake not of the offices of the state, are willing
to live quiet, provided that no one disturbs them in their property: but
this is not an easy matter; for it may not always happen, that those who
are at the head of public affairs are of a humane behaviour. In time
of war the poor are accustomed to show no alacrity without they have
provisions found them; when they have, then indeed they are willing to
fight.

In some governments the power is vested not only in those who bear arms,
but also in those who have borne them. Among the Malienses the state was
composed of these latter only, for all the officers were soldiers who
had served their time. And the first states in Greece which succeeded
those where kingly power was established, were governed by the military.
First of all the horse, for at that time the strength and excellence of
the army depended on the horse, for as to the heavy-armed foot they were
useless without proper discipline; but the art of tactics was not known
to the ancients, for which reason their strength lay in their horse: but
when cities grew larger, and they depended more on their foot, greater
numbers partook of the freedom of the city; for which reason what we
call republics were formerly called democracies. The ancient governments
were properly oligarchies or kingdoms; for on account of the few persons
in each state, it would have been impossible to have found a sufficient
number of the middle rank; so these being but few, and those used to
subordination, they more easily submitted to be governed.

We have now shown why there are many sorts of governments, and others
different from those we have treated of: for there are more species of
democracies than one, and the like is true of other forms, and what are
their differences, and whence they arise; and also of all others
which is the best, at least in general; and which is best suited for
particular people.




CHAPTER XIV


We will now proceed to make some general reflections upon the
governments next in order, and also to consider each of them in
particular; beginning with those principles which appertain to each: now
there are three things in all states which a careful legislator ought
well to consider, which are of great consequence to all, and which
properly attended to the state must necessarily be happy; and according
to the variation of which the one will differ from the other. The first
of these is the [1298a] public assembly; the second the officers of the
state, that is, who they ought to be, and with what power they should be
entrusted, and in what manner they should be appointed; the third, the
judicial department.

Now it is the proper business of the public assembly to determine
concerning war and peace, making or breaking off alliances, to enact
laws, to sentence to death, banishment, or confiscation of goods, and to
call the magistrates to account for their behaviour when in office. Now
these powers must necessarily be entrusted to the citizens in general,
or all of them to some; either to one magistrate or more; or some to
one, and some to another, or some to all, but others to some: to entrust
all to all is in the spirit of a democracy, for the people aim at
equality. There are many methods of delegating these powers to the
citizens at large, one of which is to let them execute them by turn, and
not altogether, as was done by Tellecles, the Milesian, in his state. In
others the supreme council is composed of the different magistrates,
and they succeed to the offices of the community by proper divisions of
tribes, wards, and other very small proportions, till every one in his
turn goes through them: nor does the whole community ever meet together,
without it is when new laws are enacted, or some national affair is
debated, or to hear what the magistrates have to propose to them.
Another method is for the people to meet in a collective body, but
only for the purpose of holding the comitia, making laws, determining
concerning war or peace, and inquiring into the conduct of their
magistrates, while the remaining part of the public business is
conducted by the magistrates, who have their separate departments, and
are chosen out of the whole community either by vote or ballot. Another
method is for the people in general to meet for the choice of the
magistrates, and to examine into their conduct; and also to deliberate
concerning war and alliances, and to leave other things to the
magistrates, whoever happen to be chosen, whose particular employments
are such as necessarily require persons well skilled therein. A fourth
method is for every person to deliberate upon every subject in public
assembly, where the magistrates can determine nothing of themselves, and
have only the privilege of giving their opinions first; and this is the
method of the most pure democracy, which is analogous to the proceedings
in a dynastic oligarchy and a tyrannic monarchy.

These, then, are the methods in which public business is conducted in a
democracy. When the power is in the hands of part of the community
only, it is an oligarchy and this also admits of different customs; for
whenever the officers of the state are chosen out of those who have a
moderate fortune, and these from that circumstance are many, and
when they depart not from that line which the law has laid down, but
carefully follow it, and when all within the census are eligible,
certainly it is then an oligarchy, but founded on true principles of
government [1298b] from its moderation. When the people in general do
not partake of the deliberative power, but certain persons chosen for
that purpose, who govern according to law; this also, like the first,
is an oligarchy. When those who have the deliberative power elect each
other, and the son succeeds to the father, and when they can supersede
the laws, such a government is of necessity a strict oligarchy. When
some persons determine on one thing, and others on another, as war and
peace, and when all inquire into the conduct of their magistrates, and
other things are left to different officers, elected either by vote or
lot, then the government is an aristocracy or a free state. When some
are chosen by vote and others by lot, and these either from the people
in general, or from a certain number elected for that purpose, or if
both the votes and the lots are open to all, such a state is partly an
aristocracy, partly a free government itself. These are the different
methods in which the deliberative power is vested in different states,
all of whom follow some regulation here laid down. It is advantageous to
a democracy, in the present sense of the word, by which I mean a state
wherein the people at large have a supreme power, even over the laws, to
hold frequent public assemblies; and it will be best in this particular
to imitate the example of oligarchies in their courts of justice; for
they fine those who are appointed to try causes if they do not attend,
so should they reward the poor for coming to the public assemblies:
and their counsels will be best when all advise with each other, the
citizens with the nobles, the nobles with the citizens. It is also
advisable when the council is to be composed of part of the citizens, to
elect, either by vote or lot, an equal number of both ranks. It is also
proper, if the common people in the state are very numerous, either not
to pay every one for his attendance, but such a number only as will make
them equal to the nobles, or to reject many of them by lot.

In an oligarchy they should either call up some of the common people to
the council, or else establish a court, as is done in some other states,
whom they call pre-advisers or guardians of the laws, whose business
should be to propose first what they should afterwards enact. By this
means the people would have a place in the administration of public
affairs, without having it in their power to occasion any disorder in
the government. Moreover, the people may be allowed to have a vote
in whatever bill is proposed, but may not themselves propose anything
contrary thereto; or they may give their advice, while the power of
determining may be with the magistrates only. It is also necessary to
follow a contrary practice to what is established in democracies,
for the people should be allowed the power of pardoning, but not
of condemning, for the cause should be referred back again to the
magistrates: whereas the contrary takes place in republics; for the
power of pardoning is with the few, but not of condemning, which is
always referred [1299a] to the people at large. And thus we determine
concerning the deliberative power in any state, and in whose hands it
shall be.




CHAPTER XV


We now proceed to consider the choice of magistrates; for this branch of
public business contains many different Parts, as how many there shall
be, what shall be their particular office, and with respect to time how
long each of them shall continue in place; for some make it six months,
others shorter, others for a year, others for a much longer time; or
whether they should be perpetual or for a long time, or neither; for
the same person may fill the same office several times, or he may not be
allowed to enjoy it even twice, but only once: and also with respect to
the appointment of magistrates, who are to be eligible, who is to choose
them, and in what manner; for in all these particulars we ought properly
to distinguish the different ways which may be followed; and then to
show which of these is best suited to such and such governments.

Now it is not easy to determine to whom we ought properly to give the
name of magistrate, for a government requires many persons in office;
but every one of those who is either chosen by vote or lot is not to be
reckoned a magistrate. The priests, for instance, in the first place;
for these are to be considered as very different from civil magistrates:
to these we may add the choregi and heralds; nay, even ambassadors are
elected: there are some civil employments which belong to the citizens;
and these are either when they are all engaged in one thing, as when as
soldiers they obey their general, or when part of them only are, as in
governing the women or educating the youth; and also some economic, for
they often elect corn-meters: others are servile, and in which, if they
are rich, they employ slaves. But indeed they are most properly called
magistrates, who are members of the deliberative council, or decide
causes, or are in some command, the last more especially, for to command
is peculiar to magistrates. But to speak truth, this question is of
no great consequence, nor is it the province of the judges to decide
between those who dispute about words; it may indeed be an object of
speculative inquiry; but to inquire what officers are necessary in a
state, and how many, and what, though not most necessary, may yet be
advantageous in a well-established government, is a much more useful
employment, and this with respect to all states in general, as well as
to small cities.

In extensive governments it is proper to allot one employment to one
person, as there are many to serve the public in so numerous a society,
where some may be passed over for a long time, and others never be in
office but once; and indeed everything is better done which has the
whole attention of one person, than when that [1299b] attention is
divided amongst many; but in small states it is necessary that a few of
the citizens should execute many employments; for their numbers are so
small it will not be convenient to have many of them in office at the
same time; for where shall we find others to succeed them in turn? Small
states will sometimes want the same magistrates and the same laws as
large ones; but the one will not want to employ them so often as the
other; so that different charges may be intrusted to the same person
without any inconvenience, for they will not interfere with each
other, and for want of sufficient members in the community it will be
necessary. If we could tell how many magistrates are necessary in every
city, and how many, though not necessary, it is yet proper to have, we
could then the better know how many different offices one might assign
to one magistrate. It is also necessary to know what tribunals in
different places should have different things under their jurisdiction,
and also what things should always come under the cognisance of the same
magistrate; as, for instance, decency of manners, shall the clerk of the
market take cognisance of that if the cause arises in the market, and
another magistrate in another place, or the same magistrate everywhere:
or shall there be a distinction made of the fact, or the parties? as,
for instance, in decency of manners, shall it be one cause when it
relates to a man, another when it relates to a woman?

In different states shall the magistrates be different or the same?
I mean, whether in a democracy, an oligarchy, an aristocracy, and a
monarchy, the same persons shall have the same power? or shall it
vary according to the different formation of the government? as in an
aristocracy the offices of the state are allotted to those who are well
educated; in an oligarchy to those who are rich; in a democracy to the
freemen? Or shall the magistrates differ as the communities differ?
For it may happen that the very same may be sometimes proper, sometimes
otherwise: in this state it may be necessary that the magistrate have
great powers, in that but small. There are also certain magistrates
peculiar to certain states--as the pre-advisers are not proper in a
democracy, but a senate is; for one such order is necessary, whose
business shall be to consider beforehand and prepare those bills which
shall be brought before the people that they may have leisure to
attend to their own affairs; and when these are few in number the state
inclines to an oligarchy. The pre-advisers indeed must always be few
for they are peculiar to an oligarchy: and where there are both
these offices in the same state, the pre-adviser's is superior to
the senator's, the one having only a democratical power, the other an
oligarchical: and indeed the [1300a] power of the senate is lost in
those democracies, in which the people, meeting in one public assembly,
take all the business into their own hands; and this is likely to happen
either when the community in general are in easy circumstances, or when
they are paid for their attendance; for they are then at leisure often
to meet together and determine everything for themselves. A magistrate
whose business is to control the manners of the boys, or women, or who
takes any department similar to this, is to be found in an aristocracy,
not in a democracy; for who can forbid the wives of the poor from
appearing in public? neither is such a one to be met with in an
oligarchy; for the women there are too delicate to bear control. And
thus much for this subject. Let us endeavour to treat at large of the
establishment of magistrates, beginning from first principles. Now, they
differ from each other in three ways, from which, blended together,
all the varieties which can be imagined arise. The first of these
differences is in those who appoint the magistrates, the second consists
in those who are appointed, the third in the mode of appointment; and
each of these three differ in three manners; for either all the citizens
may appoint collectively, or some out of their whole body, or some out
of a particular order in it, according to fortune, family, or virtue, or
some other rule (as at Megara, where the right of election was amongst
those who had returned together to their country, and had reinstated
themselves by force of arms) and this either by vote or lot. Again,
these several modes may be differently formed together, as some
magistrates may be chosen by part of the community, others by the whole;
some out of part, others out of the whole; some by vote, others by lot:
and each of these different modes admit of a four-fold subdivision; for
either all may elect all by vote or by lot; and when all elect, they may
either proceed without any distinction, or they may elect by a certain
division of tribes, wards, or companies, till they have gone through the
whole community: and some magistrates may be elected one way, and others
another. Again, if some magistrates are elected either by vote or lot
of all the citizens, or by the vote of some and the lot of some, or
some one way and some another; that is to say, some by the vote of all,
others by the lot of all, there will then be twelve different methods
of electing the magistrates, without blending the two together. Of
these there are two adapted to a democracy; namely, to have all the
magistrates chosen out of all the people, either by vote or lot, or
both; that is to say, some of them by lot, some by vote. In a free state
the whole community should not elect at the same time, but some out of
the whole, or out of some particular rank; and this either by lot, or
vote, or both: and they should elect either out of the whole community,
or out of some particular persons in it, and this both by lot and vote.
In an oligarchy it is proper to choose some magistrates out of the whole
body of the citizens, some by vote, some by lot, others by both: by lot
is most correspondent to that form of government. In a free aristocracy,
some magistrates [1300b] should be chosen out of the community in
general, others out of a particular rank, or these by choice, those
by lot. In a pure oligarchy, the magistrates should be chosen out of
certain ranks, and by certain persons, and some of those by lot, others
by both methods; but to choose them out of the whole community is not
correspondent to the nature of this government. It is proper in an
aristocracy for the whole community to elect their magistrates out of
particular persons, and this by vote. These then are all the different
ways of electing of magistrates; and they have been allotted according
to the nature of the different communities; but what mode of proceeding
is proper for different communities, or how the offices ought to be
established, or with what powers shall be particularly explained. I mean
by the powers of a magistrate, what should be his particular province,
as the management of the finances or the laws of the state; for
different magistrates have different powers, as that of the general of
the army differs from the clerk of the market.




CHAPTER XVI


Of the three parts of which a government is formed, we now come to
consider the judicial; and this also we shall divide in the same manner
as we did the magisterial, into three parts. Of whom the judges shall
consist, and for what causes, and how. When I say of whom, I mean
whether they shall be the whole people, or some particulars; by for what
causes I mean, how many different courts shall be appointed; by how,
whether they shall be elected by vote or lot. Let us first determine how
many different courts there ought to be. Now these are eight. The
first of these is the court of inspection over the behaviour of the
magistrates when they have quitted their office; the second is to punish
those who have injured the public; the third is to take cognisance of
those causes in which the state is a party; the fourth is to decide
between magistrates and private persons, who appeal from a fine laid
upon them; the fifth is to determine disputes which may arise concerning
contracts of great value; the sixth is to judge between foreigners, and
of murders, of which there are different species; and these may all be
tried by the same judges or by different ones; for there are murders
of malice prepense and of chance-medley; there is also justifiable
homicide, where the fact is admitted, and the legality of it disputed.

There is also another court called at Athens the Court of Phreattae,
which determines points relating to a murder committed by one who has
run away, to decide whether he shall return; though such an affair
happens but seldom, and in very large cities; the seventh, to determine
causes wherein strangers are concerned, and this whether they are
between stranger and stranger or between a stranger and a citizen. The
eighth and last is for small actions, from one to five drachma's, or a
little more; for these ought also to be legally determined, but not to
be brought before the whole body of the judges. But without entering
into any particulars concerning actions for murder, and those wherein
strangers are the parties, let us particularly treat of those courts
which have the jurisdiction of those matters which more particularly
relate to the affairs of the community and which if not well conducted
occasion seditions and commotions in the state. Now, of necessity,
either all persons must have a right to judge of all these different
causes, appointed for that purpose, either by vote or lot, or all of
all, some of them by vote, and others by lot, or in some causes by vote,
in others by lot. Thus there will be four sorts of judges. There [1301a]
will be just the same number also if they are chosen out of part of the
people only; for either all the judges must be chosen out of that part
either by vote or lot, or some by lot and some by vote, or the judges in
particular causes must be chosen some by vote, others by lot; by which
means there will be the same number of them also as was mentioned.
Besides, different judges may be joined together; I mean those who are
chosen out of the whole people or part of them or both; so that all
three may sit together in the same court, and this either by vote,
lot, or both. And thus much for the different sorts of judges. Of these
appointments that which admits all the community to be judges in all
causes is most suitable to a democracy; the second, which appoints that
certain persons shall judge all causes, to an oligarchy; the third,
which appoints the whole community to be judges in some causes, but
particular persons in others, to an aristocracy or free state.




BOOK V




CHAPTER I


We have now gone through those particulars we proposed to speak of; it
remains that we next consider from what causes and how alterations
in government arise, and of what nature they are, and to what the
destruction of each state is owing; and also to what form any form of
polity is most likely to shift into, and what are the means to be
used for the general preservation of governments, as well as what are
applicable to any particular state; and also of the remedies which
are to be applied either to all in general, or to any one considered
separately, when they are in a state of corruption: and here we ought
first to lay down this principle, that there are many governments, all
of which approve of what is just and what is analogically equal; and yet
have failed from attaining thereunto, as we have already mentioned; thus
democracies have arisen from supposing that those who are equal in one
thing are so in every other circumstance; as, because they are equal
in liberty, they are equal in everything else; and oligarchies, from
supposing that those who are unequal in one thing are unequal in all;
that when men are so in point of fortune, that inequality extends to
everything else. Hence it follows, that those who in some respects are
equal with others think it right to endeavour to partake of an equality
with them in everything; and those who are superior to others endeavour
to get still more; and it is this more which is the inequality: thus
most states, though they have some notion of what is just, yet are
almost totally wrong; and, upon this account, when either party has not
that share in the administration which answers to his expectations, he
becomes seditious: but those who of all others have the greatest right
to be so are the last that are; namely, those who excel in virtue;
for they alone can be called generally superior. There are, too, some
persons of distinguished families who, because they are so, disdain to
be on an equality with others, for those esteem themselves noble who
boast of their ancestors' merit and fortune: these, to speak truth, are
the origin and fountain from whence seditions arise. The alterations
which men may propose to make in governments are two; for either they
may change the state already established into some other, as when
they propose to erect an oligarchy where there is a democracy; or a
democracy, or free state, where there is an oligarchy, or an aristocracy
from these, or those from that; or else, when they have no objection
to the established government, which they like very well, but choose to
have the sole management in it themselves; either in the hands of a few
or one only. They will also raise commotions concerning the degree in
which they would have the established power; as if, for instance, the
government is an oligarchy, to have it more purely so, and in the same
manner if it is a democracy, or else to have it less so; and, in like
manner, whatever may be the nature of the government, either to extend
or contract its powers; or else to make some alterations in some parts
of it; as to establish or abolish a particular magistracy, as some
persons say Lysander endeavoured to abolish the kingly power in Sparta;
and Pausanias that of the ephori. Thus in Epidamnus there was an
alteration in one part of the constitution, for instead of the philarchi
they established a senate. It is also necessary for all the magistrates
at Athens; to attend in the court of the Helisea when any new magistrate
is created: the power of the archon also in that state partakes of the
nature of an oligarchy: inequality is always the occasion of sedition,
but not when those who are unequal are treated in a different manner
correspondent to that inequality. Thus kingly power is unequal when
exercised over equals. Upon the whole, those who aim after an equality
are the cause of seditions. Equality is twofold, either in number or
value. Equality in number is when two things contain the same parts or
the same quantity; equality in value is by proportion as two exceeds
one, and three two by the same number-thus by proportion four exceeds
two, and two one in the same degree, for two is the same part of four
that one is of two; that is to say, half. Now, all agree in what is
absolutely and simply just; but, as we have already said they dispute
concerning proportionate value; for some persons, if they are equal in
one respect, think themselves equal in all; others, if they are superior
in one thing, think they may claim the superiority in all; from whence
chiefly arise two sorts of governments, a democracy and an oligarchy;
for nobility and virtue are to be found only [1302a] amongst a few;
the contrary amongst the many; there being in no place a hundred of
the first to be met with, but enough of the last everywhere. But to
establish a government entirely upon either of these equalities is
wrong, and this the example of those so established makes evident,
for none of them have been stable; and for this reason, that it is
impossible that whatever is wrong at the first and in its principles
should not at last meet with a bad end: for which reason in some things
an equality of numbers ought to take place, in others an equality in
value. However, a democracy is safer and less liable to sedition than an
oligarchy; for in this latter it may arise from two causes, for either
the few in power may conspire against each other or against the
people; but in a democracy only one; namely, against the few who aim
at exclusive power; but there is no instance worth speaking of, of
a sedition of the people against themselves. Moreover, a government
composed of men of moderate fortunes comes much nearer to a democracy
than an oligarchy, and is the safest of all such states.




CHAPTER II


Since we are inquiring into the causes of seditions and revolutions
in governments, we must begin entirely with the first principles from
whence they arise. Now these, so to speak, are nearly three in number;
which we must first distinguish in general from each other, and
endeavour to show in what situation people are who begin a sedition;
and for what causes; and thirdly, what are the beginnings of political
troubles and mutual quarrels with each other. Now that cause which of
all others most universally inclines men to desire to bring about a
change in government is that which I have already mentioned; for those
who aim at equality will be ever ready for sedition, if they see those
whom they esteem their equals possess more than they do, as well as
those also who are not content with equality but aim at superiority, if
they think that while they deserve more than, they have only equal with,
or less than, their inferiors. Now, what they aim at may be either just
or unjust; just, when those who are inferior are seditious, that they
may be equal; unjust, when those who are equal are so, that they may
be superior. These, then, are the situations in which men will be
seditious: the causes for which they will be so are profit and honour;
and their contrary: for, to avoid dishonour or loss of fortune by
mulcts, either on their own account or their friends, they will raise
a commotion in the state. The original causes which dispose men to the
things which I have mentioned are, taken in one manner, seven in number,
in another they are more; two of which are the same with those that
have been already mentioned: but influencing in a different manner;
for profit and honour sharpen men against each other; not to get the
possession of them for themselves (which was what I just now supposed),
but when they see others, some justly, others [1302b] unjustly,
engrossing them. The other causes are haughtiness, fear, eminence,
contempt, disproportionate increase in some part of the state. There are
also other things which in a different manner will occasion revolutions
in governments; as election intrigues, neglect, want of numbers, a too
great dissimilarity of circumstances.




CHAPTER III


What influence ill-treatment and profit have for this purpose, and how
they may be the causes of sedition, is almost self-evident; for when the
magistrates are haughty and endeavour to make greater profits than their
office gives them, they not only occasion seditions amongst each other,
but against the state also who gave them their power; and this their
avarice has two objects, either private property or the property of the
state. What influence honours have, and how they may occasion sedition,
is evident enough; for those who are themselves unhonoured while they
see others honoured, will be ready for any disturbance: and these things
are done unjustly when any one is either honoured or discarded contrary
to their deserts, justly when they are according to them. Excessive
honours are also a cause of sedition when one person or more are greater
than the state and the power of the government can permit; for then
a monarchy or a dynasty is usually established: on which account the
ostracism was introduced in some places, as at Argos and Athens: though
it is better to guard against such excesses in the founding of a state,
than when they have been permitted to take place, to correct them
afterward. Those who have been guilty of crimes will be the cause of
sedition, through fear of punishment; as will those also who expect an
injury, that they may prevent it; as was the case at Rhodes, when the
nobles conspired against the people on account of the decrees they
expected would pass against them. Contempt also is a cause of sedition
and conspiracies; as in oligarchies, where there are many who have
no share in the administration. The rich also even in democracies,
despising the disorder and anarchy which will arise, hope to better
themselves by the same means which happened at Thebes after the battle
of Oenophyta, where, in consequence of bad administration, the democracy
was destroyed; as it was at Megara, where the power of the people was
lost through anarchy and disorder; the same thing happened at Syracuse
before the tyranny of Gelon; and at Rhodes there was the same sedition
before the popular government was overthrown. Revolutions in state will
also arise from a disproportionate increase; for as the body consists
of many parts, it ought to increase proportion-ably to preserve its
symmetry, which would otherwise be destroyed; as if the foot was to
be four cubits long, and the rest of the body but two palms; it might
otherwise [1303a] be changed into an animal of a different form, if it
increase beyond proportion not only in quantity, but also in disposition
of parts; so also a city consists of parts, some of which may often
increase without notice, as the number of poor in democracies and free
states. They will also sometimes happen by accident, as at Tarentum, a
little after the Median war, where so many of the nobles were killed in
a battle by the lapygi, that from a free state the government was turned
into a democracy; and at Argos, where so many of the citizens were
killed by Cleomenes the Spartan, that they were obliged to admit several
husbandmen to the freedom of the state: and at Athens, through the
unfortunate event of the infantry battles, the number of the nobles was
reduced by the soldiers being chosen from the list of citizens in
the Lacedaemonian wars. Revolutions also sometimes take place in
a democracy, though seldomer; for where the rich grow numerous or
properties increase, they become oligarchies or dynasties. Governments
also sometimes alter without seditions by a combination of the meaner
people; as at Hersea: for which purpose they changed the mode of
election from votes to lots, and thus got themselves chosen: and by
negligence, as when the citizens admit those who are not friends to
the constitution into the chief offices of the state, which happened
at Orus, when the oligarchy of the archons was put an end to at the
election of Heracleodorus, who changed that form of government into a
democratic free state. By little and little, I mean by this, that very
often great alterations silently take place in the form of government
from people's overlooking small matters; as at Ambracia, where the
census was originally small, but at last became nothing at all, as if a
little and nothing at all were nearly or entirely alike. That state
also is liable to seditions which is composed of different nations, till
their differences are blended together and undistinguishable; for as a
city cannot be composed of every multitude, so neither can it in every
given time; for which reason all those republics which have hitherto
been originally composed of different people or afterwards admitted
their neighbours to the freedom of their city, have been most liable
to revolutions; as when the Achaeans joined with the Traezenians
in founding Sybaris; for soon after, growing more powerful than the
Traezenians, they expelled them from the city; from whence came the
proverb of Sybarite wickedness: and again, disputes from a like cause
happened at Thurium between the Sybarites and those who had joined with
them in building the city; for they assuming upon these, on account of
the country being their own, were driven out. And at Byzantium the new
citizens, being detected in plots against the state, were driven out of
the city by force of arms. The Antisseans also, having taken in those
who were banished from Chios, afterwards did the same thing; and
also the Zancleans, after having taken in the people of Samos. The
Appolloniats, in the Euxine Sea, having admitted their sojourners to
the freedom of their city, were troubled with seditions: and the
Syracusians, after the expulsion of their tyrants, having enrolled
[1303b] strangers and mercenaries amongst their citizens, quarrelled
with each other and came to an open rupture: and the people of
Amphipolis, having taken in a colony of Chalcidians, were the greater
part of them driven out of the city by them. Many persons occasion
seditions in oligarchies because they think themselves ill-used in not
sharing the honours of the state with their equals, as I have already
mentioned; but in democracies the principal people do the same because
they have not more than an equal share with others who are not equal
to them. The situation of the place will also sometimes occasion
disturbances in the state when the ground is not well adapted for one
city; as at Clazomene, where the people who lived in that part of the
town called Chytrum quarrelled with them who lived in the island, and
the Colophonians with the Notians. At Athens too the disposition of the
citizens is not the same, for those who live in the Piraeus are more
attached to a popular government than those who live in the city
properly so called; for as the interposition of a rivulet, however
small, will occasion the line of the phalanx to fluctuate, so any
trifling disagreement will be the cause of seditions; but they will not
so soon flow from anything else as from the disagreement between virtue
and vice, and next to that between poverty and riches, and so on in
order, one cause having more influence than another; one of which that I
last mentioned.




CHAPTER IV


But seditions in government do not arise for little things, but from
them; for their immediate cause is something of moment. Now, trifling
quarrels are attended with the greatest consequences when they arise
between persons of the first distinction in the state, as was the
case with the Syracusians in a remote period; for a revolution in the
government was brought about by a quarrel between two young men who were
in office, upon a love affair; for one of them being absent, the other
seduced his mistress; he in his turn, offended with this, persuaded his
friend's wife to come and live with him; and upon this the whole city
took part either with the one or the other, and the government was
overturned: therefore every one at the beginning of such disputes ought
to take care to avoid the consequences; and to smother up all quarrels
which may happen to arise amongst those in power, for the mischief lies
in the beginning; for the beginning is said to be half of the business,
so that what was then but a little fault will be found afterwards to
bear its full proportion to what follows. Moreover, disputes between men
of note involve the whole city in their consequences; in Hestiaea,
after the Median war: two brothers having a dispute about their paternal
estate; he who was the poorer, from the other's having concealed part
of the effects, and some money which his father had found, engaged the
popular party on his side, while the other, who was rich, the men of
fashion. And at Delphos, [1304a] a quarrel about a wedding was the
beginning of all the seditions that afterwards arose amongst them; for
the bridegroom, being terrified by some unlucky omen upon waiting
upon the bride, went away without marrying her; which her relations
resenting, contrived secretly to convey some sacred money into his
pocket while he was sacrificing, and then killed him as an impious
person. At Mitylene also, a dispute, which arose concerning a right
of heritage, was the beginning of great evils, and a war with the
Athenians, in which Paches took their city, for Timophanes, a man
of fortune, leaving two daughters, Doxander, who was circumvented in
procuring them in marriage for his two sons, began a sedition, and
excited the Athenians to attack them, being the host of that state.
There was also a dispute at Phocea, concerning a right of inheritance,
between Mnasis, the father of Mnasis, and Euthucrates, the father of
Onomarchus, which brought on the Phoceans the sacred war. The government
too of Epidamnus was changed from a quarrel that arose from an intended
marriage; for a certain man having contracted his daughter in marriage,
the father of the young person to whom she was contracted, being archon,
punishes him, upon which account he, resenting the affront, associated
himself with those who were excluded from any share in the government,
and brought about a revolution. A government may be changed either into
an oligarchy, democracy, or a free state; when the magistrates, or any
part of the city acquire great credit, or are increased in power, as the
court of Areopagus at Athens, having procured great credit during the
Median war, added firmness to their administration; and, on the other
hand, the maritime force, composed of the commonalty, having gained the
victory at Salamis, by their power at sea, got the lead in the state,
and strengthened the popular party: and at Argos, the nobles,
having gained great credit by the battle of Mantinea against the
Lacedaemonians, endeavoured to dissolve the democracy. And at Syracuse,
the victory in their war with the Athenians being owing to the common
people, they changed their free state into a democracy: and at Chalcis,
the people having taken off the tyrant Phocis, together with the nobles,
immediately seized the government: and at Ambracia also the people,
having expelled the tyrant Periander, with his party, placed the
supreme power in themselves. And this in general ought to be known,
that whosoever has been the occasion of a state being powerful, whether
private persons, or magistrates, a certain tribe, or any particular part
of the citizens, or the multitude, be they who they will, will be the
cause of disputes in the state. For either some persons, who envy them
the honours they have acquired, will begin to be seditious, or they,
on account of the dignity they have acquired, will not be content with
their former equality. A state is also liable to commotions when those
parts of it which seem to be opposite to each other approach to an
[1304b] equality, as the rich and the common people; so that the part
which is between them both is either nothing at all, or too little to be
noticed; for if one party is so much more powerful than the other, as
to be evidently stronger, that other will not be willing to hazard the
danger: for which reason those who are superior in excellence and virtue
will never be the cause of seditions; for they will be too few for that
purpose when compared to the many. In general, the beginning and the
causes of seditions in all states are such as I have now described, and
revolutions therein are brought about in two ways, either by violence or
fraud: if by violence, either at first by compelling them to submit to
the change when it is made. It may also be brought about by fraud in
two different ways, either when the people, being at first deceived,
willingly consent to an alteration in their government, and are
afterwards obliged by force to abide by it: as, for instance, when the
four hundred imposed upon the people by telling them that the king
of Persia would supply them with money for the war against the
Lacedaemonians; and after they had been guilty of this falsity, they
endeavoured to keep possession of the supreme power; or when they are
at first persuaded and afterwards consent to be governed: and by one of
these methods which I have mentioned are all revolutions in governments
brought about.




CHAPTER V


We ought now to inquire into those events which will arise from these
causes in every species of government. Democracies will be most subject
to revolutions from the dishonesty of their demagogues; for partly, by
informing against men of property, they induce them to join together
through self-defence, for a common fear will make the greatest enemies
unite; and partly by setting the common people against them: and this is
what any one may continually see practised in many states. In the island
of Cos, for instance, the democracy was subverted by the wickedness
of the demagogues, for the nobles entered into a combination with
each other. And at Rhodes the demagogues, by distributing of bribes,
prevented the people from paying the trierarchs what was owing to them,
who were obliged by the number of actions they were harassed with to
conspire together and destroy the popular state. The same thing was
brought about at Heraclea, soon after the settlement of the city, by
the same persons; for the citizens of note, being ill treated by them,
quitted the city, but afterwards joining together they returned and
overthrew the popular state. Just in the same manner the democracy
was destroyed in Megara; for there the demagogues, to procure money by
confiscations, drove out the nobles, till the number of those who were
banished was considerable, who, [1305a] returning, got the better of the
people in a battle, and established an oligarchy. The like happened at
Cume, during the time of the democracy, which Thrasymachus destroyed;
and whoever considers what has happened in other states may perceive the
same revolutions to have arisen from the same causes. The demagogues,
to curry favour with the people, drive the nobles to conspire together,
either by dividing their estates, or obliging them to spend them on
public services, or by banishing them, that they may confiscate the
fortunes of the wealthy. In former times, when the same person was both
demagogue and general, the democracies were changed into tyrannies; and
indeed most of the ancient tyrannies arose from those states: a reason
for which then subsisted, but not now; for at that time the demagogues
were of the soldiery; for they were not then powerful by their
eloquence; but, now the art of oratory is cultivated, the able speakers
are at present the demagogues; but, as they are unqualified to act in
a military capacity, they cannot impose themselves on the people as
tyrants, if we except in one or two trifling instances. Formerly, too,
tyrannies were more common than now, on account of the very extensive
powers with which some magistrates were entrusted: as the prytanes at
Miletus; for they were supreme in many things of the last consequence;
and also because at that time the cities were not of that very great
extent, the people in general living in the country, and being employed
in husbandry, which gave them, who took the lead in public affairs, an
opportunity, if they had a turn for war, to make themselves tyrants;
which they all did when they had gained the confidence of the people;
and this confidence was their hatred to the rich. This was the case of
Pisistratus at Athens, when he opposed the Pediaci: and of Theagenes in
Megara, who slaughtered the cattle belonging to the rich, after he
had seized those who kept them by the riverside. Dionysius also, for
accusing Daphnseus and the rich, was thought worthy of being raised to a
tyranny, from the confidence which the people had of his being a popular
man in consequence of these enmities. A government shall also alter from
its ancient and approved democratic form into one entirely new, if
there is no census to regulate the election of magistrates; for, as the
election is with the people, the demagogues who are desirous of being in
office, to flatter them, will endeavour with all their power to make the
people superior even to the laws. To prevent this entirely, or at least
in a great measure, the magistrates should be elected by the tribes, and
not by the people at large. These are nearly the revolutions to which
democracies are liable, and also the causes from whence they arise.




CHAPTER VI


There are two things which of all others most evidently occasion a
revolution in an oligarchy; one is, when the people are ill used, for
then every individual is ripe for [1305b] sedition; more particularly if
one of the oligarchy should happen to be their leader; as Lygdamis, at
Naxus, who was afterwards tyrant of that island. Seditions also which
arise from different causes will differ from each other; for sometimes
a revolution is brought about by the rich who have no share in the
administration, which is in the hands of a very few indeed: and this
happened at Massilia, Ister, Heraclea, and other cities; for those who
had no share in the government ceased not to raise disputes till they
were admitted to it: first the elder brothers, and then the younger
also: for in some places the father and son are never in office at the
same time; in others the elder and younger brother: and where this is
observed the oligarchy partakes something of a free state. At Ister it
was changed into a democracy; in Heraclea, instead of being in the
hands of a few, it consisted of six hundred. At Cnidus the oligarchy
was destroyed by the nobles quarrelling with each other, because the
government was in the hands of so few: for there, as we have just
mentioned, if the father was in office, the son could not; or, if there
were many brothers, the eldest only; for the people, taking advantage of
their disputes, elected one of the nobles for their general, and got the
victory: for where there are seditions government is weak. And formerly
at Erithria, during the oligarchy of the Basilides, although the state
flourished greatly under their excellent management, yet because the
people were displeased that the power should be in the hands of so
few, they changed the government. Oligarchies also are subject to
revolutions, from those who are in office therein, from the quarrels of
the demagogues with each other. The demagogues are of two sorts; one
who flatter the few when they are in power: for even these have their
demagogues; such was Charicles at Athens, who had great influence over
the thirty; and, in the same manner, Phrynichus over the four hundred.
The others are those demagogues who have a share in the oligarchy,
and flatter the people: such were the state-guardians at Larissa, who
flattered the people because they were elected by them. And this will
always happen in every oligarchy where the magistrates do not elect
themselves, but are chosen out of men either of great fortune or certain
ranks, by the soldiers or by the people; as was the custom at Abydos.
And when the judicial department is not in the hands of the supreme
power, the demagogues, favouring the people in their causes, overturn
the government; which happened at Heraclea in Pontus: and also when
some desire to contract the power of the oligarchy into fewer hands; for
those who endeavour to support an equality are obliged to apply to the
people for assistance. An oligarchy is also subject to revolutions
when the nobility spend their fortunes by luxury; for such persons are
desirous of innovations, and either endeavour to be tyrants themselves
or to support others in being so, as [1306a] Hypparinus supported
Dionysius of Syracuse. And at Amphipolis one Cleotimus collected a
colony of Chalcidians, and when they came set them to quarrel with
the rich: and at AEgina a certain person who brought an action against
Chares attempted on that account to alter the government. Sometimes they
will try to raise commotions, sometimes they will rob the public, and
then quarrel with each other, or else fight with those who endeavour
to detect them; which was the case at Apollonia in Pontus. But if the
members of an oligarchy agree among themselves the state is not very
easily destroyed without some external force. Pharsalus is a proof of
this, where, though the place is small, yet the citizens have great
power, from the prudent use they make of it. An oligarchy also will be
destroyed when they create another oligarchy under it; that is, when the
management of public affairs is in the hands of a few, and not equally,
but when all of them do not partake of the supreme power, as happened
once at Elis, where the supreme power in general was in the hands of a
very few out of whom a senate was chosen, consisting but of ninety, who
held their places for life; and their mode of election was calculated to
preserve the power amongst each other's families, like the senators at
Lacedaemon. An oligarchy is liable to a revolution both in time of
war and peace; in war, because through a distrust in the citizens the
government is obliged to employ mercenary troops, and he to whom they
give the command of the army will very often assume the tyranny, as
Timophanes did at Corinth; and if they appoint more than one general,
they will very probably establish a dynasty: and sometimes, through fear
of this, they are forced to let the people in general have some share in
the government, because they are obliged to employ them. In peace,
from their want of confidence in each other, they will entrust the
guardianship of the state to mercenaries and their general, who will
be an arbiter between them, and sometimes become master of both, which
happened at Larissa, when Simos and the Aleuadae had the chief power.
The same thing happened at Abydos, during the time of the political
clubs, of which Iphiades' was one. Commotions also will happen in an
oligarchy from one party's overbearing and insulting another, or
from their quarrelling about their law-suits or marriages. How their
marriages, for instance, will have that effect has been already shown:
and in Eretria, Diagoras destroyed the oligarchy of the knights upon the
same account. A sedition also arose at Heraclea, from a certain person
being condemned by the court; and at Thebes, in consequence of a man's
being guilty of adultery; [1306b] the punishment indeed which Eurytion
suffered at Heraclea was just, yet it was illegally executed: as was
that at Thebes upon Archias; for their enemies endeavoured to have them
publicly bound in the pillory. Many revolutions also have been brought
about in oligarchies by those who could not brook the despotism which
those persons assumed who were in power, as at Cnidus and Chios. Changes
also may happen by accident in what we call a free state and in an
oligarchy; wheresoever the senators, judges, and magistrates are chosen
according to a certain census; for it often happens that the highest
census is fixed at first; so that a few only could have a share in
the government, in an oligarchy, or in a free state those of moderate
fortunes only; when the city grows rich, through peace or some other
happy cause, it becomes so little that every one's fortune is equal to
the census, so that the whole community may partake of all the honours
of government; and this change sometimes happens by little and little,
and insensible approaches, sometimes quicker. These are the revolutions
and seditions that arise in oligarchies, and the causes to which they
are owing: and indeed both democracies and oligarchies sometimes alter,
not into governments of a contrary form, but into those of the same
government; as, for instance, from having the supreme power in the law
to vest it in the ruling party, or the contrariwise.




CHAPTER VII


Commotions also arise in aristocracies, from there being so few persons
in power (as we have already observed they do in oligarchies, for in
this particular an aristocracy is most near an oligarchy, for in both
these states the administration of public affairs is in the hands of
a few; not that this arises from the same cause in both, though herein
they chiefly seem alike): and these will necessarily be most likely to
happen when the generality of the people are high-spirited and think
themselves equal to each other in merit; such were those at Lacedasmon,
called the Partheniae (for these were, as well as others, descendants
of citizens), who being detected in a conspiracy against the state, were
sent to found Tarentum. They will happen also when some great men are
disgraced by those who have received higher honours than themselves, to
whom they are no ways inferior in abilities, as Lysander by the kings:
or when an ambitious man cannot get into power, as Cinadon, who, in the
reign of Agesilaus, was chief in a conspiracy against the Spartans:
and also when some are too poor and others too rich, which will most
frequently happen in time of war; as at Lacedaemon during the Messenian
war, which is proved by a poem of Tyrtaeus, [1307a] called "Eunomia;"
for some persons being reduced thereby, desired that the lands might
be divided: and also when some person of very high rank might still be
higher if he could rule alone, which seemed to be Pausanias's intention
at Lacedaemon, when he was their general in the Median war, and Anno's
at Carthage. But free states and aristocracies are mostly destroyed from
want of a fixed administration of public affairs; the cause of which
evil arises at first from want of a due mixture of the democratic and
the oligarchic parts in a free state; and in an aristocracy from the
same causes, and also from virtue not being properly joined to power;
but chiefly from the two first, I mean the undue mixture of the
democratic and oligarchic parts; for these two are what all free
states endeavour to blend together, and many of those which we call
aristocracies, in this particular these states differ from each other,
and on this account the one of them is less stable than the other, for
that state which inclines most to an oligarchy is called an aristocracy,
and that which inclines most to a democracy is called a free state; on
which account this latter is more secure than the former, for the wider
the foundation the securer the building, and it is ever best to live
where equality prevails. But the rich, if the community gives them rank,
very often endeavour to insult and tyrannise over others. On the whole,
whichever way a government inclines, in that it will settle, each party
supporting their own. Thus a free state will become a democracy; an
aristocracy an oligarchy; or the contrary, an aristocracy may change
into a democracy (for the poor, if they think themselves injured,
directly take part with the contrary side) and a free state into an
oligarchy. The only firm state is that where every one enjoys that
equality he has a right to and fully possesses what is his own. And what
I have been speaking of happened to the Thurians; for the magistrates
being elected according to a very high census, it was altered to a
lower, and they were subdivided into more courts, but in consequence of
the nobles possessing all the land, contrary to law; the state was too
much of an oligarchy, which gave them an opportunity of encroaching
greatly on the rest of the people; but these, after they had been well
inured to war, so far got the better of their guards as to expel every
one out of the country who possessed more than he ought. Moreover, as
all aristocracies are free oligarchies, the nobles therein endeavour to
have rather too much power, as at Lacedaemon, where property is now in
the hands of a few, and the nobles have too much liberty to do as they
please and make such alliances as they please. Thus the city of the
Locrians was ruined from an alliance with Dionysius; which state was
neither a democracy nor well-tempered aristocracy. But an aristocracy
chiefly approaches to a secret change by its being destroyed by degrees,
as we [1307b] have already said of all governments in general; and this
happens from the cause of the alteration being trifling; for whenever
anything which in the least regards the state is treated with contempt,
after that something else, and this of a little more consequence, will
be more easily altered, until the whole fabric of government is entirely
subverted, which happened in the government of Thurium; for the law
being that they should continue soldiers for five years, some young
men of a martial disposition, who were in great esteem amongst their
officers, despising those who had the management of public affairs,
and imagining they could easily accomplish their intention, first
endeavoured to abolish this law, with a view of having it lawful to
continue the same person perpetually in the military, perceiving that
the people would readily appoint them. Upon this, the magistrates who
are called counselors first joined together with an intention to oppose
it but were afterwards induced to agree to it, from a belief that if
that law was not repealed they would permit the management of all other
public affairs to remain in their hands; but afterwards, when they
endeavoured to restrain some fresh alterations that were making, they
found that they could do nothing, for the whole form of government was
altered into a dynasty of those who first introduced the innovations. In
short, all governments are liable to be destroyed either from within or
from without; from without when they have for their neighbour a state
whose policy is contrary to theirs, and indeed if it has great power the
same thing will happen if it is not their neighbour; of which both
the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians are a proof; for the one,
when conquerors everywhere destroyed the oligarchies; the other the
democracies. These are the chief causes of revolutions and dissensions
in governments.




CHAPTER VIII


We are now to consider upon what the preservation of governments in
general and of each state in particular depends; and, in the first
place, it is evident that if we are right in the causes we have assigned
for their destruction, we know also the means of their preservation; for
things contrary produce contraries: but destruction and preservation are
contrary to each other. In well-tempered governments it requires as much
care as anything whatsoever, that nothing be done contrary to law: and
this ought chiefly to be attended to in matters of small consequence;
for an illegality that approaches insensibly, approaches secretly, as in
a family small expenses continually repeated consume a man's income;
for the understanding is deceived thereby, as by this false argument; if
every part is little, then the whole is little: now, this in one sense
is true, in another is false, for the whole and all the parts together
are large, though made up of small parts. The first therefore of
anything is what the state ought to guard against. In the next place,
no credit ought to be given to those who endeavour to deceive the people
with false pretences; for they will be [1308a] confuted by facts. The
different ways in which they will attempt to do this have been already
mentioned. You may often perceive both aristocracies and oligarchies
continuing firm, not from the stability of their forms of government,
but from the wise conduct of the magistrates, both towards those who
have a part in the management of public affairs, and those also who
have not: towards those who have not, by never injuring them; and also
introducing those who are of most consequence amongst them into office;
nor disgracing those who are desirous of honour; or encroaching on the
property of individuals; towards those who have, by behaving to each
other upon an equality; for that equality which the favourers of a
democracy desire to have established in the state is not only just,
but convenient also, amongst those who are of the same rank: for which
reason, if the administration is in the hands of many, those rules which
are established in democracies will be very useful; as to let no one
continue in office longer than six months: that all those who are of
the same rank may have their turn; for between these there is a sort
of democracy: for which reason demagogues are most likely to arise up
amongst them, as we have already mentioned: besides, by this means both
aristocracies and democracies will be the less liable to be corrupted
into dynasties, because it will not be so easy for those who are
magistrates for a little to do as much mischief as they could in a
long time: for it is from hence that tyrannies arise in democracies
and oligarchies; for either those who are most powerful in each state
establish a tyranny, as the demagogues in the one, the dynasties in the
other, or the chief magistrates who have been long in power. Governments
are sometimes preserved not only by having the means of their corruption
at a great distance, but also by its being very near them; for those who
are alarmed at some impending evil keep a stricter hand over the state;
for which reason it is necessary for those who have the guardianship of
the constitution to be able to awaken the fears of the people, that they
may preserve it, and not like a night-guard to be remiss in protecting
the state, but to make the distant danger appear at hand. Great care
ought also to be used to endeavour to restrain the quarrels and disputes
of the nobles by laws, as well as to prevent those who are not already
engaged in them from taking a part therein; for to perceive an evil
at its very first approach is not the lot of every one, but of the
politician. To prevent any alteration taking place in an oligarchy or
free state on account of the census, if that happens to continue the
same while the quantity of money is increased, it will be useful to take
a general account of the whole amount of it in former times, to compare
it with the present, and to do this every year in those cities where the
census is yearly, [1308b] in larger communities once in three or five
years; and if the whole should be found much larger or much less than it
was at the time when the census was first established in the state,
let there be a law either to extend or contract it, doing both these
according to its increase or decrease; if it increases making the census
larger, if it decreases smaller: and if this latter is not done in
oligarchies and free states, you will have a dynasty arise in the one,
an oligarchy in the other: if the former is not, free states will
be changed into democracies, and oligarchies into free states or
democracies. It is a general maxim in democracies, oligarchies,
monarchies, and indeed in all governments, not to let any one acquire a
rank far superior to the rest of the community, but rather to endeavour
to confer moderate honours for a continuance than great ones for a short
time; for these latter spoil men, for it is not every one who can bear
prosperity: but if this rule is not observed, let not those honours
which were conferred all at once be all at once taken away, but rather
by degrees. But, above all things, let this regulation be made by the
law, that no one shall have too much power, either by means of his
fortune or friends; but if he has, for his excess therein, let it be
contrived that he shall quit the country. Now, as many persons promote
innovations, that they may enjoy their own particular manner of living,
there ought to be a particular officer to inspect the manners of every
one, and see that these are not contrary to the genius of the state
in which he lives, whether it may be an oligarchy, a democracy, or any
other form of government; and, for the same reason, those should be
guarded against who are most prosperous in the city: the means of doing
which is by appointing those who are otherwise to the business and the
offices of the state. I mean, to oppose men of account to the common
people, the poor to the rich, and to blend both these into one body, and
to increase the numbers of those who are in the middle rank; and
this will prevent those seditions which arise from an inequality of
condition. But above all, in every state it is necessary, both by the
laws and every other method possible, to prevent those who are employed
by the public from being venal, and this particularly in an oligarchy;
for then the people will not be so much displeased from seeing
themselves excluded from a share in the government (nay, they will
rather be glad to have leisure to attend their private affairs) as at
suspecting that the officers of the state steal the public money, then
indeed they are afflicted with double concern, both because they are
deprived of the honours of the state, and pillaged by those who enjoy
them. There is one method of blending together a democracy and an
aristocracy, [1309a] if office brought no profit; by which means both
the rich and the poor will enjoy what they desire; for to admit all to
a share in the government is democratical; that the rich should be
in office is aristocratical. This must be done by letting no public
employment whatsoever be attended with any emolument; for the poor will
not desire to be in office when they can get nothing by it, but had
rather attend to their own affairs: but the rich will choose it, as
they want nothing of the community. Thus the poor will increase their
fortunes by being wholly employed in their own concerns; and the
principal part of the people will not be governed by the lower sort.
To prevent the exchequer from being defrauded, let all public money be
delivered out openly in the face of the whole city, and let copies of
the accounts be deposited in the different wards tribes, and divisions.
But, as the magistrates are to execute their offices without any
advantages, the law ought to provide proper honours for those who
execute them well. In democracies also it is necessary that the rich
should be protected, by not permitting their lands to be divided, nor
even the produce of them, which in some states is done unperceivably. It
would be also better if the people would prevent them when they offer to
exhibit a number of unnecessary and yet expensive public entertainments
of plays, music, processions, and the like. In an oligarchy it is
necessary to take great care of the poor, and allot them public
employments which are gainful; and, if any of the rich insult them, to
let their punishment be severer than if they insulted one of their own
rank; and to let estates pass by affinity, and not gift: nor to permit
any person to have more than one; for by this means property will be
more equally divided, and the greater part of the poor get into better
circumstances. It is also serviceable in a democracy and an oligarchy
to allot those who take no part in public affairs an equality or a
preference in other things; the rich in a democracy, to the poor in an
oligarchy: but still all the principal offices in the state to be filled
only by those who are best qualified to discharge them.




CHAPTER IX


There are three qualifications necessary for those who fill the
first departments in government; first of all, an affection for the
established constitution; second place, abilities every way completely
equal to the business of their office; in the third, virtue and justice
correspondent to the nature of that particular state they are placed in;
for if justice is not the same in all states, it is evident that there
must be different species thereof. There may be some doubt, when all
these qualifications do not in the same persons, in what manner the
choice shall be made; as for instance, suppose that one person is
an accomplished general, but a bad man and no friend to the [1309b]
constitution; another is just and a friend to it, which shall one
prefer? we should then consider of two qualities, which of them the
generality possess in a greater degree, which in a less; for which
reason in the choice of a general we should regard his courage more than
his virtue as the more uncommon quality; as there are fewer capable of
conducting an army than there are good men: but, to protect the state
or manage the finances, the contrary rule should be followed; for these
require greater virtue than the generality are possessed of, but only
that knowledge which is common to all. It may be asked, if a man has
abilities equal to his appointment in the state, and is affectionate to
the constitution, what occasion is there for being virtuous, since
these two things alone are sufficient to enable him to be useful to
the public? it is, because those who possess those qualities are often
deficient in prudence; for, as they often neglect their own affairs,
though they know them and love themselves, so nothing will prevent their
serving the public in the same manner. In short, whatsoever the laws
contain which we allow to be useful to the state contributes to its
preservation: but its first and principal support is (as has been often
insisted upon) to have the number of those who desire to preserve it
greater than those who wish to destroy it. Above all things that ought
not to be forgotten which many governments now corrupted neglect;
namely, to preserve a mean. For many things seemingly favourable to a
democracy destroy a democracy, and many things seemingly favourable to
an oligarchy destroy an oligarchy. Those who think this the only virtue
extend it to excess, not considering that as a nose which varies a
little from perfect straightness, either towards a hook nose or a
flat one, may yet be beautiful and agreeable to look at; but if this
particularity is extended beyond measure, first of all the properties of
the part is lost, but at last it can hardly be admitted to be a nose at
all, on account of the excess of the rise or sinking: thus it is with
other parts of the human body; so also the same thing is true with
respect to states; for both an oligarchy and a democracy may something
vary from their most perfect form and yet be well constituted; but if
any one endeavours to extend either of them too far, at first he will
make the government the worse for it, but at last there will be no
government at all remaining. The lawgiver and the politician therefore
should know well what preserves and what destroys a democracy or an
oligarchy, for neither the one nor the other can possibly continue
without rich and poor: but that whenever an entire equality of
circumstances [1310a] prevails, the state must necessarily become of
another form; so that those who destroy these laws, which authorise an
inequality in property, destroy the government. It is also an error in
democracies for the demagogues to endeavour to make the common people
superior to the laws; and thus by setting them at variance with the
rich, dividing one city into two; whereas they ought rather to speak
in favour of the rich. In oligarchies, on the contrary, it is wrong to
support those who are in administration against the people. The oaths
also which they take in an oligarchy ought to be contrary to what they
now are; for, at present, in some places they swear, "I will be adverse
to the common people, and contrive all I can against them;" whereas they
ought rather to suppose and pretend the contrary; expressing in their
oaths, that they will not injure the people. But of all things which I
have mentioned, that which contributes most to preserve the state is,
what is now most despised, to educate your children for the state; for
the most useful laws, and most approved by every statesman, will be of
no service if the citizens are not accustomed to and brought up in
the principles of the constitution; of a democracy, if that is by law
established; of an oligarchy, if that is; for if there are bad morals
in one man, there are in the city. But to educate a child fit for the
state, it must not be done in the manner which would please either those
who have the power in an oligarchy or those who desire a democracy, but
so as they may be able to conduct either of these forms of governments.
But now the children of the magistrates in an oligarchy are brought up
too delicately, and the children of the poor hardy with exercise
and labour; so that they are both desirous of and able to promote
innovations. In democracies of the purest form they pursue a method
which is contrary to their welfare; the reason of which is, that they
define liberty wrong: now, there are two things which seem to be the
objects of a democracy, that the people in general should possess the
supreme power, and all enjoy freedom; for that which is just seems to
be equal, and what the people think equal, that is a law: now, their
freedom and equality consists in every one's doing what they please:
that is in such a democracy every one may live as he likes; "as his
inclination guides," in the words of Euripides: but this is wrong, for
no one ought to think it slavery to live in subjection to government,
but protection. Thus I have mentioned the causes of corruption in
different states, and the means of their preservation.




CHAPTER X


It now remains that we speak of monarchies, their causes of corruption,
and means of preservation; and indeed almost the same things which have
been said of other governments happen to kingdoms and tyrannies; for a
kingdom partakes of an aristocracy, a tyranny of the worst species of an
oligarchy and democracy; for which reason it is the worst that man
can submit to, as being composed of two, both of which are bad, and
collectively retains all the corruptions and all the defects of both
these states. These two species of monarchies arise from principles
contrary to each other: a kingdom is formed to protect the better sort
of people against the multitude, and kings are appointed out of those,
who are chosen either for their superior virtue and actions flowing from
virtuous principles, or else from their noble descent; but a tyrant is
chosen out of the meanest populace; an enemy to the better sort, that
the common people may not be oppressed by them. That this is true
experience convinces us; for the generality of tyrants were indeed mere
demagogues, who gained credit with the people by oppressing the nobles.
Some tyrannies were established in this manner after the cities were
considerably enlarged--others before that time, by kings who exceeded
the power which their country allowed them, from a desire of governing
despotically: others were founded by those who were elected to the
superior offices in the state; for formerly the people appointed
officers for life, who came to be at the head of civil and religious
affairs, and these chose one out of their body in whom the supreme power
over all the magistrates was placed. By all these means it was easy
to establish a tyranny, if they chose it; for their power was ready at
hand, either by their being kings, or else by enjoying the honours of
the state; thus Phidon at Argos and other tyrants enjoyed originally the
kingly power; Phalaris and others in Ionia, the honours of the state.
Pansetius at Leontium, Cypselus at Corinth, Pisistratus at Athens,
Dionysius at Syracuse, and others, acquired theirs by having been
demagogues. A kingdom, as we have said, partakes much of the nature of
an aristocracy, and is bestowed according to worth, as either virtue,
family, beneficent actions, or these joined with power; for those who
have been benefactors to cities and states, or have it in their powers
to be so, have acquired this honour, and those who have prevented a
people from falling into slavery by war, as Codrus, or those who have
freed them from it, as Cyrus, or the founders of cities, or settlers of
colonies, as the kings of Sparta, Macedon, and Molossus. A king desires
to be the guardian of his people, that those who have property may be
secure in the possession of it, and that the people in general meet with
no injury; but a tyrant, as has been often said, has no regard to the
common good, except for his own advantage; his only object is pleasure,
but a king's is virtue: what a tyrant therefore is ambitious of
engrossing is wealth, but a king rather honour. The guards too of a king
are citizens, a tyrant's foreigners.

That a tyranny contains all that is bad both in a democracy and an
oligarchy is evident; with an oligarchy it has for its end gain, as the
only means of providing the tyrant with guards and the luxuries of life;
like that it places no confidence in the people; and therefore deprives
them of the use of arms: it is also common to them both to persecute the
populace, to drive them out of the city and their own habitations. With
a democracy it quarrels with the nobles, and destroys them both
publicly and privately, or drives them into banishment, as rivals and
an impediment to the government; hence naturally arise conspiracies
both amongst those who desire to govern and those who desire not to be
slaves; hence arose Periander's advice to Thrasybulus to take off the
tallest stalks, hinting thereby, that it was necessary to make away with
the eminent citizens. We ought then in reason, as has been already
said, to account for the changes which arise in a monarchy from the
same causes which produce them in other states: for, through injustice
received, fear, and contempt, many of those who are under a monarchical
government conspire against it; but of all species of injustice,
injurious contempt has most influence on them for that purpose:
sometimes it is owing to their being deprived of their private fortunes.
The dissolution too of a kingdom and a tyranny are generally the same;
for monarchs abound in wealth and honour, which all are desirous to
obtain. Of plots: some aim at the life of those who govern, others at
their government; the first arises from hatred to their persons; which
hatred may be owing to many causes, either of which will be sufficient
to excite their anger, and the generality of those who are under the
influence of that passion will join in a conspiracy, not for the sake
of their own advancement, but for revenge. Thus the plot against
the children of Pisistratus arose from their injurious treatment of
Harmodius's sister, and insulting him also; for Harmodius resenting the
injury done to his sister, and Aristogiton the injury done to Harmodius.
Periander the tyrant of Ambracia also lost his life by a conspiracy, for
some improper liberties he took with a boy in his cups: and Philip was
slain by Pausanias for neglecting to revenge him of the affront he had
received from Attains; as was Amintas the Little by Darda, for insulting
him on account of his age; and the eunuch by Evagoras the Cyprian in
revenge for having taken his son's wife away from him....

Many also who have had their bodies scourged with stripes have, through
resentment, either killed those who caused them to be inflicted or
conspired against them, even when they had kingly power, as at Mitylene
Megacles, joining with his friends, killed the Penthelidee, who used
to go about striking those they met with clubs. Thus, in later times,
Smendes killed Penthilus for whipping him and dragging him away from
his wife. Decamnichus also was the chief cause of the conspiracy against
Archelaus, for he urged others on: the occasion of his resentment was
his having delivered him to Euripides the poet to be scourged; for
Euripides was greatly offended with him for having said something of the
foulness of his breath. And many others have been killed or conspired
against on the same account. Fear too is a cause which produces the
same effects, as well in monarchies as in other states: thus Artabanes
conspired against Xerxes through fear of punishment for having hanged
Darius according to his orders, whom he supposed he intended to pardon,
as the order was given at supper-time. Some kings also have been [1312a]
dethroned and killed in consequence of the contempt they were held in by
the people; as some one conspired against Sardanapalus, having seen him
spinning with his wife, if what is related of him is true, or if not of
him, it may very probably be true of some one else. Dion also conspired
against Dionysius the Younger, seeing his subjects desirous of a
conspiracy, and that he himself was always drunk: and even a man's
friends will do this if they despise him; for from the confidence he
places in them, they think that they shall not be found out. Those
also who think they shall gain his throne will conspire against a king
through contempt; for as they are powerful themselves, and despise the
danger, on account of their own strength, they will readily attempt it.
Thus a general at the head of his army will endeavour to dethrone the
monarch, as Cyrus did Astyages, despising both his manner of life and
his forces; his forces for want of action, his life for its effeminacy:
thus Suthes, the Thracian, who was general to Amadocus, conspired
against him. Sometimes more than one of these causes will excite men
to enter into conspiracies, as contempt and desire of gain; as in the
instance of Mithridates against Ariobarzanes. Those also who are of a
bold disposition, and have gained military honours amongst kings, will
of all others be most like to engage in sedition; for strength and
courage united inspire great bravery: whenever, therefore, these join
in one person, he will be very ready for conspiracies, as he will easily
conquer. Those who conspire against a tyrant through love of glory
and honour have a different motive in view from what I have already
mentioned; for, like all others who embrace danger, they have only glory
and honour in view, and think, not as some do, of the wealth and pomp
they may acquire, but engage in this as they would in any other noble
action, that they may be illustrious and distinguished, and destroy a
tyrant, not to succeed in his tyranny, but to acquire renown. No doubt
but the number of those who act upon this principle is small, for we
must suppose they regard their own safety as nothing in case they should
not succeed, and must embrace the opinion of Dion (which few can do)
when he made war upon Dionysius with a very few troops; for he said,
that let the advantage he made be ever so little it would satisfy him to
have gained it; and that, should it be his lot to die the moment he had
gained footing in his country, he should think his death sufficiently
glorious. A tyranny also is exposed to the same destruction as all other
states are, from too powerful neighbours: for it is evident, that an
opposition of principles will make them desirous of subverting it;
and what they desire, all who can, do: and there is a principle of
opposition in one state to another, as a democracy against a tyranny, as
says Hesiod, "a potter against a potter;" for the extreme of a democracy
is a tyranny; a kingly power against an aristocracy, from their
different forms of government--for which reason the Lacedaemonians
destroyed many tyrannies; as did the Syracusians during the prosperity
of their state. Nor are they only destroyed from without, but also
from within, when those who have no share in the power bring about a
revolution, as happened to Gelon, and lately to Dionysius; to the first,
by means of Thrasybulus, the brother of Hiero, who nattered Gelon's
son, and induced him to lead a life of pleasure, that he himself might
govern; but the family joined together and endeavoured to support the
tyranny and expel Thrasybulus; but those whom they made of their party
seized the opportunity and expelled the whole family. Dion made war
against his relation Dionysius, and being assisted by the people, first
expelled and then killed him. As there are two causes which chiefly
induce men to conspire against tyrants, hatred and contempt, one of
these, namely hatred, seems inseparable from them. Contempt also is
often the cause of their destruction: for though, for instance, those
who raised themselves to the supreme power generally preserved it; but
those who received it from them have, to speak truth, almost immediately
all of them lost it; for, falling into an effeminate way of life, they
soon grew despicable, and generally fell victims to conspiracies. Part
of their hatred may be very fitly ascribed to anger; for in some cases
this is their motive to action: for it is often a cause which impels
them to act more powerfully than hatred, and they proceed with greater
obstinacy against those whom they attack, as this passion is not under
the direction of reason. Many persons also indulge this passion through
contempt; which occasioned the fall of the Pisistratidae and many
others. But hatred is more powerful than anger; for anger is accompanied
with grief, which prevents the entrance of reason; but hatred is free
from it. In short, whatever causes may be assigned as the destruction
of a pure oligarchy unmixed with any other government and an extreme
democracy, the same may be applied to a tyranny; for these are divided
tyrannies.

Kingdoms are seldom destroyed by any outward attack; for which reason
they are generally very stable; but they have many causes of subversion
within; of which two are the principal; one is when those who are
in power [1313a] excite a sedition, the other when they endeavour to
establish a tyranny by assuming greater power than the law gives them.
A kingdom, indeed, is not what we ever see erected in our times, but
rather monarchies and tyrannies; for a kingly government is one that
is voluntarily submitted to, and its supreme power admitted upon great
occasions: but where many are equal, and there are none in any respect
so much better than another as to be qualified for the greatness and
dignity of government over them, then these equals will not willingly
submit to be commanded; but if any one assumes the government, either by
force or fraud, this is a tyranny. To what we have already said we shall
add, the causes of revolutions in an hereditary kingdom. One of these
is, that many of those who enjoy it are naturally proper objects of
contempt only: another is, that they are insolent while their power is
not despotic; but they possess kingly honours only. Such a state is soon
destroyed; for a king exists but while the people are willing to obey,
as their submission to him is voluntary, but to a tyrant involuntary.
These and such-like are the causes of the destruction of monarchies.




CHAPTER XI


Monarchies, in a word, are preserved by means contrary to what I have
already mentioned as the cause of their destruction; but to speak to
each separately: the stability of a kingdom will depend upon the power
of the king's being kept within moderate bounds; for by how much the
less extensive his power is, by so much the longer will his government
continue; for he will be less despotic and more upon an equality of
condition with those he governs; who, on that account, will envy him the
less.

It was on this account that the kingdom of the Molossi continued so
long; and the Lacedaemonians from their government's being from the
beginning divided into two parts, and also by the moderation introduced
into the other parts of it by Theopompus, and his establishment of the
ephori; for by taking something from the power he increased the duration
of the kingdom, so that in some measure he made it not less, but bigger;
as they say he replied to his wife, who asked him if he was not ashamed
to deliver down his kingdom to his children reduced from what he
received it from his ancestors? No, says he, I give it him more lasting.
Tyrannies are preserved two ways most opposite to each other, one of
which is when the power is delegated from one to the other, and in this
manner many tyrants govern in their states. Report says that Periander
founded many of these. There are also many of them to be met with
amongst the Persians. What has been already mentioned is as conducive
as anything can be to preserve a tyranny; namely, to keep down those who
are of an aspiring disposition, to take off those who will not submit,
to allow no public meals, no clubs, no education, nothing at all, but
to guard against everything that gives rise to high spirits or mutual
confidence; nor to suffer the learned meetings of those who are at
leisure to hold conversation with each other; and to endeavour by every
means possible to keep all the people strangers to each other; for
knowledge increases mutual confidence; and to oblige all strangers to
appear in public, and to live near the city-gate, that all their actions
may be sufficiently seen; for those who are kept like slaves seldom
entertain any noble thoughts: in short, to imitate everything which the
Persians and barbarians do, for they all contribute to support slavery;
and to endeavour to know what every one who is under their power does
and says; and for this purpose to employ spies: such were those women
whom the Syracusians called potagogides Hiero also used to send out
listeners wherever there was any meeting or conversation; for the people
dare not speak with freedom for fear of such persons; and if any one
does, there is the less chance of its being concealed; and to endeavour
that the whole community should mutually accuse and come to blows with
each other, friend with friend, the commons with the nobles, and the
rich with each other. It is also advantageous for a tyranny that all
those who are under it should be oppressed with poverty, that they may
not be able to compose a guard; and that, being employed in procuring
their daily bread, they may have no leisure to conspire against their
tyrants. The Pyramids of Egypt are a proof of this, and the votive
edifices of the Cyposelidse, and the temple of Jupiter Olympus, built by
the Pisistratidae, and the works of Polycrates at Samos; for all these
produced one end, the keeping the people poor. It is necessary also to
multiply taxes, as at Syracuse; where Dionysius in the space of five
years collected all the private property of his subjects into his own
coffers. A tyrant also should endeavour to engage his subjects in a war,
that they may have employment and continually depend upon their general.
A king is preserved by his friends, but a tyrant is of all persons the
man who can place no confidence in friends, as every one has it in his
desire and these chiefly in their power to destroy him. All these things
also which are done in an extreme democracy should be done in a tyranny,
as permitting great licentiousness to the women in the house, that they
may reveal their husbands' secrets; and showing great indulgence to
slaves also for the same reason; for slaves and women conspire not
against tyrants: but when they are treated with kindness, both of them
are abettors of tyrants, and extreme democracies also; and the people
too in such a state desire to be despotic. For which reason flatterers
are in repute in both these: the demagogue in the democracy, for he is
the proper flatterer of the people; among tyrants, he who will servilely
adapt himself to their humours; for this is the business of [1314a]
flatterers. And for this reason tyrants always love the worst of
wretches, for they rejoice in being flattered, which no man of a liberal
spirit will submit to; for they love the virtuous, but flatter none. Bad
men too are fit for bad purposes; "like to like," as the proverb says. A
tyrant also should show no favour to a man of worth or a freeman; for he
should think, that no one deserved to be thought these but himself; for
he who supports his dignity, and is a friend to freedom, encroaches upon
the superiority and the despotism of the tyrant: such men, therefore,
they naturally hate, as destructive to their government. A tyrant
also should rather admit strangers to his table and familiarity than
citizens, as these are his enemies, but the others have no design
against him. These and such-like are the supports of a tyranny, for
it comprehends whatsoever is wicked. But all these things may be
comprehended in three divisions, for there are three objects which a
tyranny has in view; one of which is, that the citizens should be of
poor abject dispositions; for such men never propose to conspire against
any one. The second is, that they should have no confidence in each
other; for while they have not this, the tyrant is safe enough from
destruction. For which reason they are always at enmity with those of
merit, as hurtful to their government; not only as they scorn to be
governed despotically, but also because they can rely upon each other's
fidelity, and others can rely upon theirs, and because they will not
inform against their associates, nor any one else. The third is, that
they shall be totally without the means of doing anything; for no one
undertakes what is impossible for him to perform: so that without power
a tyranny can never be destroyed. These, then, are the three objects
which the inclinations of tyrants desire to see accomplished; for all
their tyrannical plans tend to promote one of these three ends, that
their people may neither have mutual confidence, power, nor spirit.
This, then, is one of the two methods of preserving tyrannies: the other
proceeds in a way quite contrary to what has been already described,
and which may be discerned from considering to what the destruction of
a kingdom is owing; for as one cause of that is, making the government
approach near to a tyranny, so the safety of a tyranny consists in
making the government nearly kingly; preserving only one thing, namely
power, that not only the willing, but the unwilling also, must be
obliged to submit; for if this is once lost, the tyranny is at an end.
This, then, as the foundation, must be preserved: in other particulars
carefully do and affect to seem like a king; first, appear to pay a
great attention [1314b] to what belongs to the public; nor make such
profuse presents as will offend the people; while they are to supply
the money out of the hard labour of their own hands, and see it given
in profusion to mistresses, foreigners, and fiddlers; keeping an exact
account both of what you receive and pay; which is a practice some
tyrants do actually follow, by which means they seem rather fathers of
families than tyrants: nor need you ever fear the want of money while
you have the supreme power of the state in your own hands. It is also
much better for those tyrants who quit their kingdom to do this than to
leave behind them money they have hoarded up; for their regents will
be much less desirous of making innovations, and they are more to be
dreaded by absent tyrants than the citizens; for such of them as he
suspects he takes with him, but these regents must be left behind. He
should also endeavour to appear to collect such taxes and require such
services as the exigencies of the state demand, that whenever they are
wanted they may be ready in time of war; and particularly to take care
that he appear to collect and keep them not as his own property, but the
public's. His appearance also should not be severe, but respectable, so
that he should inspire those who approach him with veneration and not
fear; but this will not be easily accomplished if he is despised. If,
therefore, he will not take the pains to acquire any other, he ought to
endeavour to be a man of political abilities, and to fix that opinion of
himself in the judgment of his subjects. He should also take care not to
appear to be guilty of the least offence against modesty, nor to suffer
it in those under him: nor to permit the women of his family to treat
others haughtily; for the haughtiness of women has been the ruin of many
tyrants. With respect to the pleasures of sense, he ought to do directly
contrary to the practice of some tyrants at present; for they do not
only continually indulge themselves in them for many days together, but
they seem also to desire to have other witnesses of it, that they may
wonder at their happiness; whereas he ought really to be moderate in
these, and, if not, to appear to others to avoid them-for it is not the
sober man who is exposed either to plots or contempt, but the drunkard;
not the early riser, but the sluggard. His conduct in general should
also be contrary to what is reported of former tyrants; for he ought to
improve and adorn his city, so as to seem a guardian and not a tyrant;
and, moreover., always to [1315a] seem particularly attentive to the
worship of the gods; for from persons of such a character men entertain
less fears of suffering anything illegal while they suppose that he who
governs them is religious and reverences the gods; and they will be less
inclined to raise insinuations against such a one, as being peculiarly
under their protection: but this must be so done as to give no occasion
for any suspicion of hypocrisy. He should also take care to show such
respect to men of merit in every particular, that they should not think
they could be treated with greater distinction by their fellow-citizens
in a free state. He should also let all honours flow immediately from
himself, but every censure from his subordinate officers and judges. It
is also a common protection of all monarchies not to make one person too
great, or, certainly, not many; for they will support each other: but,
if it is necessary to entrust any large powers to one person, to take
care that it is not one of an ardent spirit; for this disposition is
upon every opportunity most ready for a revolution: and, if it should
seem necessary to deprive any one of his power, to do it by degrees,
and not reduce him all at once. It is also necessary to abstain from all
kinds of insolence; more particularly from corporal punishment; which
you must be most cautious never to exercise over those who have a
delicate sense of honour; for, as those who love money are touched to
the quick when anything affects their property, so are men of honour and
principle when they receive any disgrace: therefore, either never employ
personal punishment, or, if you do, let it be only in the manner in
which a father would correct his son, and not with contempt; and, upon
the whole, make amends for any seeming disgrace by bestowing greater
honours. But of all persons who are most likely to entertain designs
against the person of a tyrant, those are chiefly to be feared and
guarded against who regard as nothing the loss of their own lives, so
that they can but accomplish their purpose: be very careful therefore
of those who either think themselves affronted, or those who are dear
to them; for those who are excited by anger to revenge regard as nothing
their own persons: for, as Heraclitus says, it is dangerous to fight
with an angry man who will purchase with his life the thing he aims at.
As all cities are composed of two sorts of persons, the rich and the
poor, it is necessary that both these should find equal protection from
him who governs them, and that the one party should not have it in their
power to injure the other; but that the tyrant should attach to himself
that party which is the most powerful; which, if he does, he will have
no occasion either to make his slaves free, or to deprive citizens of
their arms; for the strength of either of the parties added to his
own forces will render him superior to any conspiracy. It would be
superfluous to go through all particulars; for the rule of conduct which
the tyrant ought to pursue is evident enough, and that is, to affect to
appear not the tyrant, but the king; the guardian of those he governs,
not their plunderer, [1315b] but their protector, and to affect
the middle rank in life, not one superior to all others: he should,
therefore, associate his nobles with him and soothe his people; for his
government will not only be necessarily more honourable and worthy of
imitation, as it will be over men of worth, and not abject wretches who
perpetually both hate and fear him; but it will be also more durable.
Let him also frame his life so that his manners may be consentaneous
to virtue, or at least let half of them be so, that he may not be
altogether wicked, but only so in part.




CHAPTER XII


Indeed an oligarchy and a tyranny are of all governments of the shortest
duration. The tyranny of Orthagoras and his family at Sicyon, it is
true, continued longer than any other: the reason for which was, that
they used their power with moderation, and were in many particulars
obedient to the laws; and, as Clisthenes was an able general, he never
fell into contempt, and by the care he took that in many particulars his
government should be popular. He is reported also to have presented a
person with a crown who adjudged the victory to another; and some say
that it is the statue of that judge which is placed in the forum.

They say also, that Pisistratus submitted to be summoned into the court
of the Areopagites. The second that we shall mention is the tyranny of
the Cypselidse, at Corinth, which continued seventy-seven years and
six months; for Cypselus was tyrant there thirty years, Periander
forty-four, and Psammetichus, the son of Georgias, three years; the
reason for which was, that Cypselus was a popular man, and governed
without guards. Periander indeed ruled like a tyrant, but then he was an
able general. The third was that of the Pisistradidae at Athens; but it
was not continual: for Pisistratus himself was twice expelled; so that
out of thirty-three years he was only fifteen in power, and his son
eighteen; so that the whole time was thirty-three years. Of the rest
we shall mention that of Hiero, and Gelo at Syracuse; and this did not
continue long, for both their reigns were only eighteen years; for
Gelo died in the eighth year of his tyranny, and Hiero in his tenth.
Thrasybulus fell in his eleventh month, and many other tyrannies have
continued a very short time. We have now gone through the general cases
of corruption and [1316a] means of preservation both in free states and
monarchies. In Plato's Republic, Socrates is introduced treating upon
the changes which different governments are liable to: but his discourse
is faulty; for he does not particularly mention what changes the best
and first governments are liable to; for he only assigns the general
cause, of nothing being immutable, but that in time everything will
alter [***tr.: text is unintelligible here***] he conceives that nature
will then produce bad men, who will not submit to education, and in
this, probably, he is not wrong; for it is certain that there are some
persons whom it is impossible by any education to make good men; but
why should this change be more peculiar to what he calls the best-formed
government, than to all other forms, and indeed to all other things
that exist? and in respect to his assigned time, as the cause of the
alteration of all things, we find that those which did not begin
to exist at the same time cease to be at the same time; so that, if
anything came into beginning the day before the solstice, it must alter
at the same time. Besides, why should such a form of government be
changed into the Lacedaemonian? for, in general, when governments alter,
they alter into the contrary species to what they before were, and
not into one like their former. And this reasoning holds true of other
changes; for he says, that from the Lacedaemonian form it changes into
an oligarchy, and from thence into a democracy, and from a democracy
into a tyranny: and sometimes a contrary change takes place, as from a
democracy into an oligarchy, rather than into a monarchy. With respect
to a tyranny he neither says whether there will be any change in it; or
if not, to what cause it will be owing; or if there is, into what other
state it will alter: but the reason of this is, that a tyranny is an
indeterminate government; and, according to him, every state ought to
alter into the first, and most perfect, thus the continuity and circle
would be preserved. But one tyranny often changed into another; as
at Syria, from Myron's to Clisthenes'; or into an oligarchy, as was
Antileo's at Chalcas; or into a democracy, as was Gelo's at Syracuse; or
into an aristocracy, as was Charilaus's at Lacedaemon, and at Carthage.
An oligarchy is also changed into a tyranny; such was the rise of most
of the ancient tyrannies in Sicily; at Leontini, into the tyranny of
Panaetius; at Gela, into that of Cleander; at Rhegium into that of
Anaxilaus; and the like in many other cities. It is absurd also to
suppose, that a state is changed into an oligarchy because those who are
in power are avaricious and greedy of money, and not because those who
are by far richer than their fellow citizens think it unfair that those
who have nothing should have an equal share in the rule of the state
with themselves, who possess so much-for in many oligarchies it is not
allowable to be employed in money-getting, and there are many laws to
prevent it. But in Carthage, which is a democracy, money-getting is
creditable, and yet their form of government remains unaltered. It is
also absurd to say, that in an oligarchy there are two cities, one of
the poor and another of the rich; for why should this happen to them
more than to the Lacedaemonians, or any other state where all possess
not equal property, or where all are not equally good? for though no
one member of the community should be poorer than he was before, yet
a democracy might nevertheless change into an oligarchy; if the rich
should be more powerful than the poor, and the one too negligent, and
the other attentive: and though these changes are owing to many causes,
yet he mentions but one only, that the citizens become poor by luxury,
and paying interest-money; as if at first they were all rich, or the
greater part of them: but this is not so, but when some of those who
have the principal management of public affairs lose their fortunes,
they will endeavour to bring about a revolution; but when others do,
nothing of consequence will follow, nor when such states do alter is
there any more reason for their altering into a democracy than any
other. Besides, though some of the members of the community may not have
spent their fortunes, yet if they share not in the honours of the state,
or if they are ill-used and insulted, they will endeavour to raise
seditions, and bring about a revolution, that they may be allowed to do
as they like; which, Plato says, arises from too much liberty. Although
there are many oligarchies and democracies, yet Socrates, when he is
treating of the changes they may undergo, speaks of them as if there was
but one of each sort.




BOOK VI




CHAPTER I


We have already shown what is the nature of the supreme council in the
state, and wherein one may differ from another, and how the different
magistrates should be regulated; and also the judicial department, and
what is best suited to what state; and also to what causes both the
destruction and preservation of governments are owing.

As there are very many species of democracies, as well as of other
states, it will not be amiss to consider at the same time anything which
we may have omitted to mention concerning either of them, and to allot
to each that mode of conduct which is peculiar to and advantageous for
them; and also to inquire into the combinations of all these different
modes of government which we [1317a] have mentioned; for as these are
blended together the government is altered, as from an aristocracy to
be an oligarchy, and from a free state to be a democracy. Now, I mean
by those combinations of government (which I ought to examine into, but
have not yet done), namely, whether the deliberative department and the
election of magistrates is regulated in a manner correspondent to an
oligarchy, or the judicial to an aristocracy, or the deliberative part
only to an oligarchy, and the election of magistrates to an aristocracy,
or whether, in any other manner, everything is not regulated according
to the nature of the government. But we will first consider what
particular sort of democracy is fitted to a particular city, and also
what particular oligarchy to a particular people; and of other states,
what is advantageous to what. It is also necessary to show clearly, not
only which of these governments is best for a state, but also how
it ought to be established there, and other things we will treat of
briefly.

And first, we will speak of a democracy; and this will at the same
time show clearly the nature of its opposite which some persons call
an oligarchy; and in doing this we must examine into all the parts of
a democracy, and everything that is connected therewith; for from the
manner in which these are compounded together different species of
democracies arise: and hence it is that they are more than one, and of
various natures. Now, there are two causes which occasion there being so
many democracies; one of which is that which we have already mentioned;
namely, there being different sorts of people; for in one country the
majority are husbandmen, in another mechanics, and hired servants; if
the first of these is added to the second, and the third to both of
them, the democracy will not only differ in the particular of better or
worse, but in this, that it will be no longer the same government; the
other is that which we will now speak of. The different things which are
connected with democracies and seem to make part of these states, do,
from their being joined to them, render them different from others: this
attending a few, that more, and another all. It is necessary that he who
would found any state which he may happen to approve of, or correct one,
should be acquainted with all these particulars. All founders of states
endeavour to comprehend within their own plan everything of nearly the
same kind with it; but in doing this they err, in the manner I have
already described in treating of the preservation and destruction of
governments. I will now speak of these first principles and manners, and
whatever else a democratical state requires.




CHAPTER II


Now the foundation of a democratical state is liberty, and people have
been accustomed to say this as if here only liberty was to be found; for
they affirm that this is the end proposed by every democracy. But one
part of liberty is to govern and be governed alternately; for, according
to democratical justice, equality is measured by numbers, and not by
worth: and this being just, it is necessary that the supreme power
should be vested in the people at large; and that what the majority
determine should be final: so that in a democracy the poor ought to have
more power than the rich, as being the greater number; for this is one
mark of liberty which all framers of a democracy lay down as a criterion
of that state; another is, to live as every one likes; for this, they
say, is a right which liberty gives, since he is a slave who must live
as he likes not. This, then, is another criterion of a democracy. Hence
arises the claim to be under no command whatsoever to any one, upon any
account, any otherwise than by rotation, and that just as far only as
that person is, in his turn, under his also. This also is conducive to
that equality which liberty demands. These things being premised, and
such being the government, it follows that such rules as the following
should be observed in it, that all the magistrates should be chosen out
of all the people, and all to command each, and each in his turn all:
that all the magistrates should be chosen by lot, except to those
offices only which required some particular knowledge and skill: that no
census, or a very small one, should be required to qualify a man for any
office: that none should be in the same employment twice, or very few,
and very seldom, except in the army: that all their appointments should
be limited to a very short time, or at least as many as possible:
that the whole community should be qualified to judge in all causes
whatsoever, let the object be ever so extensive, ever so interesting, or
of ever so high a nature; as at Athens, where the people at large judge
the magistrates when they come out of office, and decide concerning
public affairs as well as private contracts: that the supreme power
should be in the public assembly; and that no magistrate should be
allowed any discretionary power but in a few instances, and of no
consequence to public business. Of all magistrates a senate is best
suited to a democracy, where the whole community is not paid for giving
their attendance; for in that case it loses its power; for then the
people will bring all causes before them, by appeal, as we have
already mentioned in a former book. In the next place, there should, if
possible, be a fund to pay all the citizens--who have any share in the
management of public affairs, either as members of the assembly, judges,
and magistrates; but if this cannot be done, at least the magistrates,
the judges the senators, and members of the supreme assembly, and also
those officers who are obliged to eat at a common table ought to be
paid. Moreover, as an oligarchy is said to be a government of men of
family, fortune, and education; so, on the contrary, a democracy is a
government in the hands of men of no birth, indigent circumstances, and
mechanical employments. In this state also no office [1318a] should be
for life; and, if any such should remain after the government has been
long changed into a democracy, they should endeavour by degrees to
diminish the power; and also elect by lot instead of vote. These things,
then, appertain to all democracies; namely, to be established on that
principle of justice which is homogeneous to those governments; that is,
that all the members of the state, by number, should enjoy an equality,
which seems chiefly to constitute a democracy, or government of the
people: for it seems perfectly equal that the rich should have no more
share in the government than the poor, nor be alone in power; but that
all should be equal, according to number; for thus, they think, the
equality and liberty of the state best preserved.




CHAPTER III


In the next place we must inquire how this equality is to be procured.
Shall the qualifications be divided so that five hundred rich should be
equal to a thousand poor, or shall the thousand have equal power with
the five hundred? or shall we not establish our equality in this manner?
but divide indeed thus, and afterwards taking an equal number both out
of the five hundred and the thousand, invest them with the power of
creating the magistrates and judges. Is this state then established
according to perfect democratical justice, or rather that which is
guided by numbers only? For the defenders of a democracy say, that that
is just which the majority approve of: but the favourers of an oligarchy
say, that that is just which those who have most approve of; and that we
ought to be directed by the value of property. Both the propositions are
unjust; for if we agree with what the few propose we erect a tyranny:
for if it should happen that an individual should have more than the
rest who are rich, according to oligarchical justice, this man alone
has a right to the supreme power; but if superiority of numbers is to
prevail, injustice will then be done by confiscating the property of the
rich, who are few, as we have already said. What then that equality is,
which both parties will admit, must be collected from the definition
of right which is common to them both; for they both say that what the
majority of the state approves of ought to be established. Be it so; but
not entirely: but since a city happens to be made up of two different
ranks of people, the rich and the poor, let that be established which
is approved of by both these, or the greater part: but should there be
opposite sentiments, let that be established which shall be approved
of by the greater part: but let this be according to the census; for
instance, if there should be ten of the rich and twenty of the poor, and
six of the first and fifteen of the last should agree upon any measure,
and the remaining four of the rich should join with the remaining five
of the poor in opposing it, that party whose census when added together
should determine which opinion should be law, and should these happen
to be equal, it should be regarded as a case similar to an assembly or
court of justice dividing equally upon any question that comes before
them, who either determine it by lot or some such method. But although,
with [1318b] respect to what is equal and just, it may be very difficult
to establish the truth, yet it is much easier to do than to persuade
those who have it in their power to encroach upon others to be guided
thereby; for the weak always desire what is equal and just, but the
powerful pay no regard thereunto.




CHAPTER IV


There are four kinds of democracies. The best is that which is composed
of those first in order, as we have already said, and this also is the
most ancient of any. I call that the first which every one would place
so, was he to divide the people; for the best part of these are the
husbandmen. We see, then, that a democracy may be framed where the
majority live by tillage or pasturage; for, as their property is
but small, they will not be at leisure perpetually to hold public
assemblies, but will be continually employed in following their own
business, not having otherwise the means of living; nor will they be
desirous of what another enjoys, but will rather like to follow their
own business than meddle with state affairs and accept the offices of
government, which will be attended with no great profit; for the major
part of mankind are rather desirous of riches than honour (a proof of
this is, that they submitted to the tyrannies in ancient times, and do
now submit to the oligarchies, if no one hinders them in their usual
occupations, or deprives them of their property; for some of them soon
get rich, others are removed from poverty); besides, their having the
right of election and calling their magistrates to account for their
conduct when they come out of office, will satisfy their desire of
honours, if any of them entertain that passion: for in some states,
though the commonalty have not the right of electing the magistrates,
yet it is vested in part of that body chosen to represent them: and it
is sufficient for the people at large to possess the deliberative power:
and this ought to be considered as a species of democracy; such was that
formerly at Mantinsea: for which reason it is proper for the democracy
we have been now treating of to have a power (and it has been usual for
them to have it) of censuring their magistrates when out of office,
and sitting in judgment upon all causes: but that the chief magistrates
should be elected, and according to a certain census, which should vary
with the rank of their office, or else not by a census, but according
to their abilities for their respective appointments. A state thus
constituted must be well constituted; for the magistracies will be
always filled with the best men with the approbation of the people;
who will not envy their superiors: and these and the nobles should
be content with this part in the administration; for they will not be
governed by their inferiors. They will be also careful to use their
power with moderation, as there are others to whom full power is
delegated to censure their conduct; for it is very serviceable to the
state to have them dependent upon others, and not to be permitted to do
whatsoever they choose; for with such a liberty there would be no check
to that evil particle there is in every one: therefore it is [1319a]
necessary and most for the benefit of the state that the offices thereof
should be filled by the principal persons in it, whose characters are
unblemished, and that the people are not oppressed. It is now evident
that this is the best species of democracy, and on what account; because
the people are such and have such powers as they ought to have. To
establish a democracy of husbandmen some of those laws which were
observed in many ancient states are universally useful; as, for
instance, on no account to permit any one to possess more than a certain
quantity of land, or within a certain distance from the city. Formerly
also, in some states, no one was allowed to sell their original lot of
land. They also mention a law of one Oxylus, which forbade any one to
add to their patrimony by usury. We ought also to follow the law of
the Aphutaeans, as useful to direct us in this particular we are now
speaking of; for they having but very little ground, while they were
a numerous people, and at the same time were all husbandmen, did not
include all their lands within the census, but divided them in such a
manner that, according to the census, the poor had more power than
the rich. Next to the commonalty of husbandmen is one of shepherds and
herdsmen; for they have many things in common with them, and, by their
way of life, are excellently qualified to make good soldiers, stout in
body, and able to continue in the open air all night. The generality of
the people of whom other democracies are composed are much worse than
these; for their lives are wretched nor have they any business with
virtue in anything they do; these are your mechanics, your exchange-men,
and hired servants; as all these sorts of men frequent the exchange and
the citadel, they can readily attend the public assembly; whereas the
husbandmen, being more dispersed in the country, cannot so easily meet
together; nor are they equally desirous of doing it with these others!
When a country happens to be so situated that a great part of the land
lies at a distance from the city, there it is easy to establish a good
democracy or a free state for the people in general will be obliged to
live in the country; so that it will be necessary in such a democracy,
though there may be an exchange-mob at hand, never to allow a legal
assembly without the inhabitants of the country attend. We have shown in
what manner the first and best democracy ought to be established, and it
will be equally evident as to the rest, for from these we [1319b] should
proceed as a guide, and always separate the meanest of the people from
the rest. But the last and worst, which gives to every citizen without
distinction a share in every part of the administration, is what few
citizens can bear, nor is it easy to preserve for any long time, unless
well supported by laws and manners. We have already noticed almost every
cause that can destroy either this or any other state. Those who have
taken the lead in such a democracy have endeavoured to support it, and
make the people powerful by collecting together as many persons as they
could and giving them their freedom, not only legitimately but naturally
born, and also if either of their parents were citizens, that is to say,
if either their father or mother; and this method is better suited to
this state than any other: and thus the demagogues have usually managed.
They ought, however, to take care, and do this no longer than the common
people are superior to the nobles and those of the middle rank, and
then stop; for, if they proceed still further, they will make the
state disorderly, and the nobles will ill brook the power of the common
people, and be full of resentment against it; which was the cause of
an insurrection at Cyrene: for a little evil is overlooked, but when it
becomes a great one it strikes the eye. It is, moreover, very-useful in
such a state to do as Clisthenes did at Athens, when he was desirous of
increasing the power of the people, and as those did who established the
democracy in Cyrene; that is, to institute many tribes and fraternities,
and to make the religious rites of private persons few, and those
common; and every means is to be contrived to associate and blend the
people together as much as possible; and that all former customs be
broken through. Moreover, whatsoever is practised in a tyranny
seems adapted to a democracy of this species; as, for instance, the
licentiousness of the slaves, the women, and the children; for this to
a certain degree is useful in such a state; and also to overlook every
one's living as they choose; for many will support such a government:
for it is more agreeable to many to live without any control than as
prudence would direct.




CHAPTER V


It is also the business of the legislator and all those who would
support a government of this sort not to make it too great a work, or
too perfect; but to aim only to render it stable: for, let a state be
constituted ever so badly, there is no difficulty in its continuing a
few days: they should therefore endeavour to procure its safety by
all those ways which we have described in assigning the causes of the
preservation and destruction of governments; avoiding what is hurtful,
and by framing such laws, written and unwritten, as contain those things
which chiefly tend to the preservation of the state; nor to suppose that
that is useful either for a democratic or [1320a] an oligarchic form of
government which contributes to make them more purely so, but what will
contribute to their duration: but our demagogues at present, to flatter
the people, occasion frequent confiscations in the courts; for which
reason those who have the welfare of the state really at heart should
act directly opposite to what they do, and enact a law to prevent
forfeitures from being divided amongst the people or paid into the
treasury, but to have them set apart for sacred uses: for those who
are of a bad disposition would not then be the less cautious, as their
punishment would be the same; and the community would not be so ready to
condemn those whom they sat in judgment on when they were to get nothing
by it: they should also take care that the causes which are brought
before the public should be as few as possible, and punish with the
utmost severity those who rashly brought an action against any one; for
it is not the commons but the nobles who are generally prosecuted: for
in all things the citizens of the same state ought to be affectionate to
each other, at least not to treat those who have the chief power in
it as their enemies. Now, as the democracies which have been lately
established are very numerous, and it is difficult to get the common
people to attend the public assemblies without they are paid for it,
this, when there is not a sufficient public revenue, is fatal to the
nobles; for the deficiencies therein must be necessarily made up by
taxes, confiscations, and fines imposed by corrupt courts of justice:
which things have already destroyed many democracies. Whenever, then,
the revenues of the state are small, there should be but few public
assemblies and but few courts of justice: these, however, should have
very extensive jurisdictions, but should continue sitting a few days
only, for by this means the rich would not fear the expense, although
they should receive nothing for their attendance, though the poor did;
and judgment also would be given much better; for the rich will not
choose to be long absent from their own affairs, but will willingly
be so for a short time: and, when there are sufficient revenues, a
different conduct ought to be pursued from what the demagogues at
present follow; for now they divide the surplus of the public money
amongst the poor; these receive it and again want the same supply, while
the giving it is like pouring water into a sieve: but the true patriot
in a democracy ought to take care that the majority of the community are
not too poor, for this is the cause of rapacity in that government; he
therefore should endeavour that they may enjoy perpetual plenty; and
as this also is advantageous to the rich, what can be saved out of the
public money should be put by, and then divided at once amongst the
poor, if possible, in such a quantity as may enable every one of them to
purchase a little field, and, if that cannot be done, at least to give
each of them enough to procure the implements [1320b] of trade and
husbandry; and if there is not enough for all to receive so much at
once, then to divide it according to tribes or any other allotment. In
the meantime let the rich pay them for necessary services, but not be
obliged to find them in useless amusements. And something like this
was the manner in which they managed at Carthage, and preserved the
affections of the people; for by continually sending some of their
community into colonies they procured plenty. It is also worthy of a
sensible and generous nobility to divide the poor amongst them, and
supplying them with what is necessary, induce them to work; or to
imitate the conduct of the people at Tarentum: for they, permitting the
poor to partake in common of everything which is needful for them, gain
the affections of the commonalty. They have also two different ways of
electing their magistrates; for some are chosen by vote, others by
lot; by the last, that the people at large may have some share in the
administration; by the former, that the state may be well governed: the
same may be accomplished if of the same magistrates you choose some by
vote, others by lot. And thus much for the manner in which democracies
ought to be established.




CHAPTER VI


What has been already said will almost of itself sufficiently show how
an oligarchy ought to be founded; for he who would frame such a state
should have in his view a democracy to oppose it; for every species of
oligarchy should be founded on principles diametrically opposite to some
species of democracy.

The first and best-framed oligarchy is that which approaches near to
what we call a free state; in which there ought to be two different
census, the one high, the other low: from those who are within the
latter the ordinary officers of the state ought to be chosen; from the
former the supreme magistrates: nor should any one be excluded from a
part of the administration who was within the census; which should be
so regulated that the commonalty who are included in it should by means
thereof be superior to those who have no share in the government; for
those who are to have the management of public affairs ought always to
be chosen out of the better sort of the people. Much in the same manner
ought that oligarchy to be established which is next in order: but as to
that which is most opposite to a pure democracy, and approaches nearest
to a dynasty and a tyranny, as it is of all others the worst, so it
requires the greatest care and caution to preserve it: for as bodies of
sound and healthy constitutions and ships which are well manned and
well found for sailing can bear many injuries without perishing, while
a diseased body or a leaky ship with an indifferent crew cannot support
the [1321a] least shock; so the worst-established governments want most
looking after. A number of citizens is the preservation of a democracy;
for these are opposed to those rights which are founded in rank: on
the contrary, the preservation of an oligarchy depends upon the due
regulation of the different orders in the society.




CHAPTER VII


As the greater part of the community are divided into four sorts of
people; husbandmen, mechanics, traders, and hired servants; and as those
who are employed in war may likewise be divided into four; the horsemen,
the heavy-armed soldier, the light-armed, and the sailor, where the
nature of the country can admit a great number of horse; there a
powerful oligarchy may be easily established: for the safety of the
inhabitants depends upon a force of that sort; but those who can support
the expense of horsemen must be persons of some considerable fortune.
Where the troops are chiefly heavy-armed, there an oligarchy, inferior
in power to the other, may be established; for the heavy-armed are
rather made up of men of substance than the poor: but the light-armed
and the sailors always contribute to support a democracy: but where the
number of these is very great and a sedition arises, the other parts of
the community fight at a disadvantage; but a remedy for this evil is
to be learned from skilful generals, who always mix a proper number of
light-armed soldiers with their horse and heavy-armed: for it is with
those that the populace get the better of the men of fortune in an
insurrection; for these being lighter are easily a match for the horse
and the heavy-armed: so that for an oligarchy to form a body of troops
from these is to form it against itself: but as a city is composed of
persons of different ages, some young and some old, the fathers should
teach their sons, while they were very young, a light and easy exercise;
but, when they are grown up, they should be perfect in every warlike
exercise. Now, the admission of the people to any share in the
government should either be (as I said before) regulated by a census, or
else, as at Thebes, allowed to those who for a certain time have ceased
from any mechanic employment, or as at Massalia, where they are chosen
according to their worth, whether citizens or foreigners. With respect
to the magistrates of the highest rank which it may be necessary to
have in a state, the services they are bound to do the public should be
expressly laid down, to prevent the common people from being desirous
of accepting their employments, and also to induce them to regard their
magistrates with favour when they know what a price they pay for their
honours. It is also necessary that the magistrates, upon entering into
their offices, should make magnificent sacrifices and erect some public
structure, that the people partaking of the entertainment, and seeing
the city ornamented with votive gifts in their temples and public
structures, may see with pleasure the stability of the government: add
to this also, that the nobles will have their generosity recorded: but
now this is not the conduct which those who are at present at the head
of an oligarchy pursue, but the contrary; for they are not more desirous
of honour than of gain; for which reason such oligarchies may more
properly be called little democracies. Thus [1321b] we have explained on
what principles a democracy and an oligarchy ought to be established.




CHAPTER VIII


After what has been said I proceed next to treat particularly of the
magistrates; of what nature they should be, how many, and for what
purpose, as I have already mentioned: for without necessary magistrates
no state can exist, nor without those which contribute to its dignity
and good order can exist happily: now it is necessary that in small
states the magistrates should be few; in a large one, many: also to
know well what offices may be joined together, and what ought to be
separated. The first thing necessary is to establish proper regulators
in the markets; for which purpose a certain magistrate should be
appointed to inspect their contracts and preserve good order; for of
necessity, in almost every city there must be both buyers and sellers to
supply each other's mutual wants: and this is what is most productive
of the comforts of life; for the sake of which men seem to have joined
together in one community. A second care, and nearly related to the
first, is to have an eye both to the public and private edifices in
the city, that they may be an ornament; and also to take care of all
buildings which are likely to fall: and to see that the highways are
kept in proper repair; and also that the landmarks between different
estates are preserved, that there may be no disputes on that account;
and all other business of the same nature. Now, this business may be
divided into several branches, over each of which in populous cities
they appoint a separate person; one to inspect the buildings, another
the fountains, another the harbours; and they are called the inspectors
of the city. A third, which is very like the last, and conversant nearly
about the same objects, only in the country, is to take care of what
is done out of the city. The officers who have this employment we call
inspectors of the lands, or inspectors of the woods; but the business
of all three of them is the same. There must also be other officers
appointed to receive the public revenue and to deliver it out to those
who are in the different departments of the state: these are called
receivers or quaestors. There must also be another, before whom all
private contracts and sentences of courts should be enrolled, as well
as proceedings and declarations. Sometimes this employment is divided
amongst many, but there is one supreme over the rest; these are called
proctors, notaries, and the like. Next to these is an officer whose
business is of all others the most necessary, and yet most difficult;
namely, to take care that sentence is executed upon those who are
condemned; and that every one pays the fines laid on him; and also to
have the charge of those who are in prison. [1322a] This office is very
disagreeable on account of the odium attending it, so that no one will
engage therein without it is made very profitable, or, if they do,
will they be willing to execute it according to law; but it is most
necessary, as it is of no service to pass judgment in any cause without
that judgment is carried into execution: for without this human society
could not subsist: for which reason it is best that this office should
not be executed by one person, but by some of the magistrates of the
other courts. In like manner, the taking care that those fines which
are ordered by the judges are levied should be divided amongst different
persons. And as different magistrates judge different causes, let the
causes of the young be heard by the young: and as to those which are
already brought to a hearing, let one person pass sentence, and another
see it executed: as, for instance, let the magistrates who have the care
of the public buildings execute the sentence which the inspectors of
the markets have passed, and the like in other cases: for by so much the
less odium attends those who carry the laws into execution, by so much
the easier will they be properly put in force: therefore for the same
persons to pass the sentence and to execute it will subject them to
general hatred; and if they pass it upon all, they will be considered
as the enemies of all. Thus one person has often the custody of the
prisoner's body, while another sees the sentence against him executed,
as the eleven did at Athens: for which reason it is prudent to separate
these offices, and to give great attention thereunto as equally
necessary with anything we have already mentioned; for it will certainly
happen that men of character will decline accepting this office, and
worthless persons cannot properly be entrusted with it, as having
themselves rather an occasion for a guard than being qualified to guard
others. This, therefore, ought by no means to be a separate office from
others; nor should it be continually allotted to any individuals, but
the young men; where there is a city-guard, the youths ought in turns
to take these offices upon them. These, then, as the most necessary
magistrates, ought to be first mentioned: next to these are others no
less necessary, but of much higher rank, for they ought to be men of
great skill and fidelity. These are they who have the guard of the city,
and provide everything that is necessary for war; whose business it is,
both in war and peace, to defend the walls and the gates, and to take
care to muster and marshal the citizens. Over all these there are
sometimes more officers, sometimes fewer: thus in little cities there is
only one whom they call either general or polemarch; but where there are
horse and light-armed troops, and bowmen, and sailors, they sometimes
put distinct commanders over each of these; who again have others under
them, according to their different divisions; all of which join together
to make one military body: and thus much for this department. Since some
of the magistrates, if not all, have business with the public money,
it is necessary that there should be other officers, whose employment
should be nothing else than to take an account of what they have, and
correct any mismanagement therein. But besides all these magistrates
there is one who is supreme over them all, who very often has in his own
power the disposal of the public revenue and taxes; who presides over
the people when the supreme power is in them; for there must be some
magistrate who has a power to summon them together, and to preside as
head of the state. These are sometimes called preadvisers; but where
there are many, more properly a council. These are nearly the civil
magistrates which are requisite to a government: but there are other
persons whose business is confined to religion; as the priests, and
those who are to take care of the temples, that they are kept in proper
repair, or, if they fall down, that they may be rebuilt; and whatever
else belongs to public worship. This charge is sometimes entrusted to
one person, as in very small cities: in others it is delegated to many,
and these distinct from the priesthood, as the builders or keepers of
holy places, and officers of the sacred revenue. Next to these are
those who are appointed to have the general care of all those public
sacrifices to the tutelar god of the state, which the laws do not
entrust to the priests: and these in different states have different
appellations. To enumerate in few words the different departments of
all those magistrates who are necessary: these are either religion,
war, taxes, expenditures, markets, public buildings, harbours, highways.
Belonging to the courts of justice there are scribes to enroll private
contracts; and there must also be guards set over the prisoners, others
to see the law is executed, council on either side, and also others to
watch over the conduct of those who are to decide the causes. Amongst
the magistrates also may finally be reckoned those who are to give their
advice in public affairs. But separate states, who are peculiarly happy
and have leisure to attend to more minute particulars, and are very
attentive to good order, require particular magistrates for themselves;
such as those who have the government of the women; who are to see the
laws are executed; who take care of the boys and preside over their
education. To these may be added those who have the care of their
gymnastic exercises, [1323a] their theatres, and every other public
spectacle which there may happen to be. Some of these, however, are not
of general use; as the governors of the women: for the poor are obliged
to employ their wives and children in servile offices for want of
slaves. As there are three magistrates to whom some states entrust the
supreme power; namely, guardians of the laws, preadvisers, and senators;
guardians of the laws suit best to an aristocracy, preadvisers to an
oligarchy, and a senate to a democracy. And thus much briefly concerning
all magistrates.




BOOK VII




CHAPTER I


He who proposes to make that inquiry which is necessary concerning what
government is best, ought first to determine what manner of living is
most eligible; for while this remains uncertain it will also be equally
uncertain what government is best: for, provided no unexpected accidents
interfere, it is highly probable, that those who enjoy the best
government will live the most happily according to their circumstances;
he ought, therefore, first to know what manner of life is most desirable
for all; and afterwards whether this life is the same to the man and
the citizen, or different. As I imagine that I have already sufficiently
shown what sort of life is best in my popular discourses on that
subject, I think I may very properly repeat the same here; as most
certainly no one ever called in question the propriety of one of the
divisions; namely, that as what is good, relative to man, may be divided
into three sorts, what is external, what appertains to the body, and
what to the soul, it is evident that all these must conspire to make
a man happy: for no one would say that a man was happy who had no
fortitude, no temperance, no justice, no prudence; but was afraid of the
flies that flew round him: nor would abstain from the meanest theft if
he was either hungry or dry, or would murder his dearest friend for
a farthing; and also was in every particular as wanting in his
understanding as an infant or an idiot. These truths are so evident that
all must agree to them; though some may dispute about the quantity and
the degree: for they may think, that a very little virtue is sufficient
for happiness; but for riches, property, power, honour, and all such
things, they endeavour to increase them without bounds: but to such we
reply, that it is easy to prove from what experience teaches us in these
cases, that these external goods produce not virtue, but virtue them.
As to a happy life, whether it is to be found in pleasure or virtue or
both, certain it is, that those whose morals are most pure, and whose
understandings are best cultivated, will enjoy more of it, although
their fortune is but moderate than those do who own an exuberance of
wealth, are deficient in those; and this utility any one who reflects
may easily convince himself of; for whatsoever is external has its
boundary, as a machine, and whatsoever is useful in its excess is either
necessarily hurtful, or at best useless to the possessor; but every good
quality of the soul the higher it is in degree, so much the more useful
it is, if it is permitted on this subject to use the word useful as well
as noble. It is also very evident, that the accidents of each subject
take place of each other, as the subjects themselves, of which we allow
they are accidents, differ from each other in value; so that if the soul
is more noble than any outward possession, as the body, both in itself
and with respect to us, it must be admitted of course that the best
accidents of each must follow the same analogy. Besides, it is for the
sake of the soul that these things are desirable; and it is on this
account that wise men should desire them, not the soul for them. Let us
therefore be well assured, that every one enjoys as much happiness as he
possesses virtue and wisdom, and acts according to their dictates; since
for this we have the example of GOD Himself, _who is completely happy,
not from any external good, but in Himself, and because such is His
nature_. For good fortune is something different from happiness, as every
good which depends not on the mind is owing to chance or fortune; but
it is not from fortune that any one is wise and just: hence it follows,
that that city is happiest which is the best and acts best: for no one
can do well who acts not well; nor can the deeds either of man or city
be praiseworthy without virtue and wisdom; for whatsoever is just, or
wise, or prudent in a man, the same things are just, wise, and prudent
in a city.

Thus much by way of introduction; for I could not but just touch upon
this subject, though I could not go through a complete investigation
of it, as it properly belongs to another question: let us at present
suppose so much, that a man's happiest life, both as an individual and
as a citizen, is a life of virtue, accompanied with those enjoyments
which virtue usually procures. If [1324a] there are any who are not
convinced by what I have said, their doubts shall be answered hereafter,
at present we shall proceed according to our intended method.




CHAPTER II


It now remains for us to say whether the happiness of any individual
man and the city is the same or different: but this also is evident; for
whosoever supposes that riches will make a person happy, must place the
happiness of the city in riches if it possesses them; those who prefer a
life which enjoys a tyrannic power over others will also think, that the
city which has many others under its command is most happy: thus also
if any one approves a man for his virtue, he will think the most worthy
city the happiest: but here there are two particulars which require
consideration, one of which is, whether it is the most eligible life
to be a member of the community and enjoy the rights of a citizen, or
whether to live as a stranger, without interfering in public affairs;
and also what form of government is to be preferred, and what
disposition of the state is best; whether the whole community should be
eligible to a share in the administration, or only the greater part, and
some only: as this, therefore, is a subject of political examination
and speculation, and not what concerns the individual, and the first of
these is what we are at present engaged in, the one of these I am not
obliged to speak to, the other is the proper business of my present
design. It is evident that government must be the best which is so
established, that every one therein may have it in his power to act
virtuously and live happily: but some, who admit that a life of virtue
is most eligible, still doubt which is preferable a public life of
active virtue, or one entirely disengaged from what is without and
spent in contemplation; which some say is the only one worthy of a
philosopher; and one of these two different modes of life both now
and formerly seem to have been chosen by all those who were the most
virtuous men; I mean the public or philosophic. And yet it is of no
little consequence on which side the truth lies; for a man of sense
must naturally incline to the better choice; both as an individual and a
citizen. Some think that a tyrannic government over those near us is
the greatest injustice; but that a political one is not unjust: but that
still is a restraint on the pleasures and tranquillity of life. Others
hold the quite contrary opinion, and think that a public and active life
is the only life for man: for that private persons have no opportunity
of practising any one virtue, more than they have who are engaged
in public life the management of the [1324b] state. These are their
sentiments; others say, that a tyrannical and despotical mode of
government is the only happy one; for even amongst some free states the
object of their laws seems to be to tyrannise over their neighbours: so
that the generality of political institutions, wheresoever dispersed,
if they have any one common object in view, have all of them this,
to conquer and govern. It is evident, both from the laws of the
Lacedaemonians and Cretans, as well as by the manner in which they
educated their children, that all which they had in view was to make
them soldiers: besides, among all nations, those who have power enough
and reduce others to servitude are honoured on that account; as were the
Scythians, Persians, Thracians, and Gauls: with some there are laws to
heighten the virtue of courage; thus they tell us that at Carthage they
allowed every person to wear as many rings for distinction as he had
served campaigns. There was also a law in Macedonia, that a man who had
not himself killed an enemy should be obliged to wear a halter; among
the Scythians, at a festival, none were permitted to drink out of
the cup was carried about who had not done the same thing. Among the
Iberians, a warlike nation, they fixed as many columns upon a man's tomb
as he had slain enemies: and among different nations different things
of this sort prevail, some of them established by law, others by custom.
Probably it may seem too absurd to those who are willing to take this
subject into their consideration to inquire whether it is the business
of a legislator to be able to point out by what means a state may govern
and tyrannise over its neighbours, whether they will, or will not: for
how can that belong either to the politician or legislator which is
unlawful? for that cannot be lawful which is done not only justly, but
unjustly also: for a conquest may be unjustly made. But we see nothing
of this in the arts: for it is the business neither of the physician nor
the pilot to use either persuasion or force, the one to his patients,
the other to his passengers: and yet many seem to think a despotic
government is a political one, and what they would not allow to be just
or proper, if exercised over themselves, they will not blush to exercise
over others; for they endeavour to be wisely governed themselves, but
think it of no consequence whether others are so or not: but a despotic
power is absurd, except only where nature has framed the one party for
dominion, the other for subordination; and therefore no one ought to
assume it over all in general, but those only which are the proper
objects thereof: thus no one should hunt men either for food or
sacrifice, but what is fit for those purposes, and these are wild
animals which are eatable.

Now a city which is well governed might be very [1325a] happy in itself
while it enjoyed a good system of laws, although it should happen to be
so situated as to have no connection with any other state, though its
constitution should not be framed for war or conquest; for it would then
have no occasion for these. It is evident therefore that the business of
war is to be considered as commendable, not as a final end, but as the
means of procuring it. It is the duty of a good legislator to examine
carefully into his state; and the nature of the people, and how they may
partake of every intercourse, of a good life, and of the happiness which
results from it: and in this respect some laws and customs differ from
others. It is also the duty of a legislator, if he has any neighbouring
states to consider in what manner he shall oppose each of them, or what
good offices he shall show them. But what should be the final end of the
best governments will be considered hereafter.




CHAPTER III


We will now speak to those who, while they agree that a life of virtue
is most eligible, yet differ in the use of it addressing ourselves to
both these parties; for there are some who disapprove of all political
governments, and think that the life of one who is really free is
different from the life of a citizen, and of all others most eligible:
others again think that the citizen is the best; and that it is
impossible for him who does nothing to be well employed; but that
virtuous activity and happiness are the same thing. Now both parties in
some particulars say what is right, in others what is wrong, thus, that
the life of a freeman is better than the life of a slave is true, for
a slave, as a slave, is employed in nothing honourable; for the common
servile employments which he is commanded to perform have nothing
virtuous in them; but, on the other hand, it is not true that a
submission to all sorts of governments is slavery; for the government of
freemen differs not more from the government of slaves than slavery and
freedom differ from each other in their nature; and how they do has been
already mentioned. To prefer doing of nothing to virtuous activity is
also wrong, for happiness consists in action, and many noble ends are
produced by the actions of the just and wise. From what we have already
determined on this subject, some one probably may think, that supreme
power is of all things best, as that will enable a man to command very
many useful services from others; so that he who can obtain this ought
not to give it up to another, but rather to seize it: and, for this
purpose, the father should have no attention or regard for the son, or
the son for the father, or friend for friend; for what is best is most
eligible: but to be a member of the community and be in felicity is
best. What these persons advance might probably be true, if the supreme
good was certainly theirs who plunder and use violence to others: but
it is [1325b] most unlikely that it should be so; for it is a mere
supposition: for it does not follow that their actions are honourable
who thus assume the supreme power over others, without they were by
nature as superior to them as a man to a woman, a father to a child, a
master to a slave: so that he who so far forsakes the paths of virtue
can never return back from whence he departed from them: for amongst
equals whatever is fair and just ought to be reciprocal; for this is
equal and right; but that equals should not partake of what is equal, or
like to like, is contrary to nature: but whatever is contrary to nature
is not right; therefore, if there is any one superior to the rest of the
community in virtue and abilities for active life, him it is proper to
follow, him it is right to obey, but the one alone will not do, but must
be joined to the other also: and, if we are right in what we have now
said, it follows that happiness consists in virtuous activity, and that
both with respect to the community as well as the individual an active
life is the happiest: not that an active life must necessarily refer to
other persons, as some think, or that those studies alone are practical
which are pursued to teach others what to do; for those are much more
so whose final object is in themselves, and to improve the judgment and
understanding of the man; for virtuous activity has an end, therefore
is something practical; nay, those who contrive the plan which others
follow are more particularly said to act, and are superior to the
workmen who execute their designs. But it is not necessary that states
which choose to have no intercourse with others should remain inactive;
for the several members thereof may have mutual intercourse with each
other; for there are many opportunities for this among the different
citizens; the same thing is true of every individual: for, was it
otherwise, neither could the Deity nor the universe be perfect; to
neither of whom can anything external separately exist. Hence it is
evident that that very same life which is happy for each individual is
happy also for the state and every member of it.




CHAPTER IV


As I have now finished what was introductory to this subject, and
considered at large the nature of other states, it now remains that I
should first say what ought to be the establishment of a city which one
should form according to one's wish; for no good state can exist without
a moderate proportion of what is necessary. Many things therefore
ought to be forethought of as desirable, but none of them such as are
impossible: I mean relative to the number of citizens and the extent
of the territory: for as other artificers, such as the weaver and the
shipwright, ought to have such materials as are fit for their work,
since so much the better they are, by so much [1326a] superior will the
work itself necessarily be; so also ought the legislator and politician
endeavour to procure proper materials for the business they have in
hand. Now the first and principal instrument of the politician is the
number of the people; he should therefore know how many, and what they
naturally ought to be: in like manner the country, how large, and what
it is. Most persons think that it is necessary for a city to be large to
be happy: but, should this be true, they cannot tell what is a large one
and what a small one; for according to the multitude of the inhabitants
they estimate the greatness of it; but they ought rather to consider its
strength than its numbers; for a state has a certain object in view, and
from the power which it has in itself of accomplishing it, its greatness
ought to be estimated; as a person might say, that Hippocrates was a
greater physician, though not a greater man, than one that exceeded him
in the size of his body: but if it was proper to determine the strength
of the city from the number of the inhabitants, it should never be
collected from the multitude in general who may happen to be in it;
for in a city there must necessarily be many slaves, sojourners, and
foreigners; but from those who are really part of the city and properly
constitute its members; a multitude of these is indeed a proof of a
large city, but in a state where a large number of mechanics inhabit,
and but few soldiers, such a state cannot be great; for the greatness of
the city, and the number of men in it, are not the same thing. This too
is evident from fact, that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to
govern properly a very numerous body of men; for of all the states which
appear well governed we find not one where the rights of a citizen are
open to an indiscriminate multitude. And this is also evident from the
nature of the thing; for as law is a certain order, so good law is of
course a certain good order: but too large a multitude are incapable of
this, unless under the government of that DIVINE POWER which comprehends
the universe. Not but that, as quantity and variety are usually
essential to beauty, the perfection of a city consists in the largeness
of it as far as that largeness is consistent with that order already
mentioned: but still there is a determinate size to all cities, as well
as everything else, whether animals, plants, or machines, for each of
these, if they are neither too little nor too big, have their
proper powers; but when they have not their due growth, or are badly
constructed, as a ship a span long is not properly a ship, nor one of
two furlongs length, but when it is of a fit size; for either from its
smallness or from its largeness it may be quite useless: so is it with
a city; one that is too small has not [1326b] in itself the power of
self-defence, but this is essential to a city: one that is too large is
capable of self-defence in what is necessary; but then it is a nation
and not a city: for it will be very difficult to accommodate a form
of government to it: for who would choose to be the general of such
an unwieldy multitude, or who could be their herald but a stentor? The
first thing therefore necessary is, that a city should consist of such
numbers as will be sufficient to enable the inhabitants to live
happily in their political community: and it follows, that the more the
inhabitants exceed that necessary number the greater will the city be:
but this must not be, as we have already said, without bounds; but what
is its proper limit experience will easily show, and this experience is
to be collected from the actions both of the governors and the governed.
Now, as it belongs to the first to direct the inferior magistrates and
to act as judges, it follows that they can neither determine causes
with justice nor issue their orders with propriety without they know the
characters of their fellow-citizens: so that whenever this happens not
to be done in these two particulars, the state must of necessity be
badly managed; for in both of them it is not right to determine too
hastily and without proper knowledge, which must evidently be the case
where the number of the citizens is too many: besides, it is more easy
for strangers and sojourners to assume the rights of citizens, as they
will easily escape detection in so great a multitude. It is evident,
then, that the best boundary for a city is that wherein the numbers are
the greatest possible, that they may be the better able to be sufficient
in themselves, while at the same time they are not too large to be under
the eye and government of the magistrates. And thus let us determine the
extent of a city.




CHAPTER V


What we have said concerning a city may nearly be applied to a country;
for as to what soil it should be, every one evidently will commend it
if it is such as is sufficient in itself to furnish what will make the
inhabitants happy; for which purpose it must be able to supply them
with all the necessaries of life; for it is the having these in plenty,
without any want, which makes them content. As to its extent, it should
be such as may enable the inhabitants to live at their ease with freedom
and temperance. Whether we have done right or wrong in fixing this limit
to the territory shall be considered more minutely hereafter, when
we come particularly to inquire into property, and what fortune is
requisite for a man to live on, and how and in what manner they ought
to employ it; for there are many doubts upon this question, while each
party insists upon their own plan of life being carried to an excess,
the one of severity, the other of indulgence. What the situation of the
country should be it is not difficult to determine, in some particulars
respecting that we ought to be advised by those who are skilful in
military affairs. It should be difficult of access to an enemy, but
easy to the inhabitants: and as we said, that the number of [1327a]
inhabitants ought to be such as can come under the eye of the
magistrate, so should it be with the country; for then it is easily
defended. As to the position of the city, if one could place it to one's
wish, it is convenient to fix it on the seaside: with respect to
the country, one situation which it ought to have has been already
mentioned, namely, that it should be so placed as easily to give
assistance to all places, and also to receive the necessaries of life
from all parts, and also wood, or any other materials which may happen
to be in the country.




CHAPTER VI


But with respect to placing a city in the neighbourhood of the sea,
there are some who have many doubts whether it is serviceable or hurtful
to a well-regulated state; for they say, that the resort of persons
brought up under a different system of government is disserviceable
to the state, as well by impeding the laws as by their numbers; for a
multitude of merchants must necessarily arise from their trafficking
backward and forward upon the seas, which will hinder the well-governing
of the city: but if this inconvenience should not arise, it is evident
that it is better, both on account of safety and also for the easier
acquisition of the necessaries of life, that both the city and the
country should be near the sea; for it is necessary that those who are
to sustain the attack of the enemy should be ready with their assistance
both by land and by sea, and to oppose any inroad, both ways if possible
but if not, at least where they are most powerful, which they may
do while they possess both. A maritime situation is also useful for
receiving from others what your own country will not produce, and
exporting those necessaries of your own growth which are more than you
have occasion for; but a city ought to traffic to supply its own wants,
and not the wants of others; for those who themselves furnish an open
market for every one, do it for the sake of gain; which it is not proper
for a well-established state to do, neither should they encourage such
a commerce. Now, as we see that many places and cities have docks and
harbours lying very convenient for the city, while those who frequent
them have no communication with the citadel, and yet they are not too
far off, but are surrounded by walls and such-like fortifications, it is
evident, that if any good arises from such an intercourse the city will
receive it, but if anything hurtful, it will be easy to restrain it by
a law declaring and deputing whom the state will allow to have an
intercourse with each other, and whom not. As to a naval power, it is by
no means doubtful that it is necessary to have one to a certain degree;
and this not only for the sake of the [1327b] city itself, but also
because it may be necessary to appear formidable to some of the
neighbouring states, or to be able to assist them as well by sea as
by land; but to know how great that force should be, the health of the
state should be inquired into, and if that appears vigorous and enables
her to take the lead of other communities, it is necessary that her
force should correspond with her actions. As for that multitude of
people which a maritime power creates, they are by no means necessary to
a state, nor ought they to make a part of the citizens; for the mariners
and infantry, who have the command, are freemen, and upon these depends
a naval engagement: but when there are many servants and husbandmen,
there they will always have a number of sailors, as we now see happens
to some states, as in Heraclea, where they man many triremes, though
the extent of their city is much inferior to some others. And thus we
determine concerning the country, the port, the city, the sea, and a
maritime power: as to the number of the citizens, what that ought to be
we have already said.




CHAPTER VII


We now proceed to point out what natural disposition the members of the
community ought to be of: but this any one will easily perceive who
will cast his eye over the states of Greece, of all others the most
celebrated, and also the other different nations of this habitable
world. Those who live in cold countries, as the north of Europe, are
full of courage, but wanting in understanding and the arts: therefore
they are very tenacious of their liberty; but, not being politicians,
they cannot reduce their neighbours under their power: but the Asiatics,
whose understandings are quick, and who are conversant in the arts, are
deficient in courage; and therefore are always conquered and the
slaves of others: but the Grecians, placed as it were between these
two boundaries, so partake of them both as to be at the same time both
courageous and sensible; for which reason Greece continues free, and
governed in the best manner possible, and capable of commanding the
whole world, could they agree upon one system of policy. Now this is the
difference between the Grecians and other nations, that the latter have
but one of these qualities, whereas in the former they are both happily
blended together. Hence it is evident, that those persons ought to be
both sensible and courageous who will readily obey a legislator, the
object of whose laws is virtue. As to what some persons say, that the
military must be mild and tender to those they know, but severe and
cruel to those they know not, it is courage which [1328a] makes any one
lovely; for that is the faculty of the soul which we most admire: as
a proof of this, our resentment rises higher against our friends and
acquaintance than against those we know not: for which reason Archilaus
accusing his friends says very properly to himself, Shall my friends
insult me? The spirit of freedom and command also is what all inherit
who are of this disposition for courage is commanding and invincible. It
also is not right for any one to say, that you should be severe to those
you know not; for this behaviour is proper for no one: nor are those who
are of a noble disposition harsh in their manners, excepting only to the
wicked; and when they are particularly so, it is, as has been already
said, against their friends, when they think they have injured them;
which is agreeable to reason: for when those who think they ought to
receive a favour from any one do not receive it, beside the injury done
them, they consider what they are deprived of: hence the saying, "Cruel
are the wars of brothers;" and this, "Those who have greatly loved
do greatly hate." And thus we have nearly determined how many the
inhabitants of a city ought to be, and what their natural disposition,
and also the country how large, and of what sort is necessary; I say
nearly, because it is needless to endeavour at as great accuracy in
those things which are the objects of the senses as in those which are
inquired into by the understanding only.




CHAPTER VIII


As in natural bodies those things are not admitted to be parts of them
without which the whole would not exist, so also it is evident that in
a political state everything that is necessary thereunto is not to be
considered as a part of it, nor any other community from whence one
whole is made; for one thing ought to be common and the same to the
community, whether they partake of it equally or unequally, as, for
instance, food, land, or the like; but when one thing is for the benefit
of one person, and another for the benefit of another, in this there is
nothing like a community, excepting that one makes it and the other
uses it; as, for instance, between any instrument employed in making any
work, and the workmen, as there is nothing common between the house and
the builder, but the art of the builder is employed on the house. Thus
property is necessary for states, but property is no part of the state,
though many species of it have life; but a city is a community of
equals, for the purpose of enjoying the best life possible: but the
happiest life is the best which consists in the perfect practice of
virtuous energies: as therefore some persons have great, others little
or no opportunity of being employed in these, it is evident that this
is the cause of the difference there is between the different cities and
communities there are to be found; for while each of these endeavour to
acquire what is best by various and different means, they give [1328b]
rise to different modes of living and different forms of government. We
are now to consider what those things are without which a city cannot
possibly exist; for what we call parts of the city must of necessity
inhere in it: and this we shall plainly understand, if we know the
number of things necessary to a city: first, the inhabitants must
have food: secondly, arts, for many instruments are necessary in life:
thirdly, arms, for it is necessary that the community should have an
armed force within themselves, both to support their government against
those of their own body who might refuse obedience to it, and also
to defend it from those who might attempt to attack it from without:
fourthly, a certain revenue, as well for the internal necessities of
the state as for the business of war: fifthly, which is indeed the chief
concern, a religious establishment: sixthly in order, but first of all
in necessity, a court to determine both criminal and civil causes. These
things are absolutely necessary, so to speak, in every state; for a city
is a number of people not accidentally met together, but with a purpose
of ensuring to themselves sufficient independency and self-protection;
and if anything necessary for these purposes is wanting, it is
impossible that in such a situation these ends can be obtained. It is
necessary therefore that a city should be capable of acquiring all these
things: for this purpose a proper number of husbandmen are necessary to
procure food, also artificers and soldiers, and rich men, and priests
and judges, to determine what is right and proper.




CHAPTER IX


Having determined thus far, it remains that we consider whether all
these different employments shall be open to all; for it is possible
to continue the same persons always husbandmen, artificers, judges,
or counsellors; or shall we appoint different persons to each of those
employments which we have already mentioned; or shall some of them be
appropriated to particulars, and others of course common to all? but
this does not take place in every state, for, as we have already said,
it is possible that all may be common to all, or not, but only common to
some; and this is the difference between one government and another:
for in democracies the whole community partakes of everything, but in
oligarchies it is different.

Since we are inquiring what is the best government possible, and it is
admitted to be that in which the citizens are happy; and that, as we
have already said, it is impossible to obtain happiness without virtue;
it follows, that in the best-governed states, where the citizens are
really men of intrinsic and not relative goodness, none of them should
be permitted to exercise any mechanic employment or follow merchandise,
as being ignoble and destructive to virtue; neither should they be
husband-[1329a] men, that they may be at leisure to improve in virtue
and perform the duty they owe to the state. With respect to the
employments of a soldier, a senator, and a judge, which are evidently
necessary to the community, shall they be allotted to different persons,
or shall the same person execute both? This question, too, is easily
answered: for in some cases the same persons may execute them, in
others they should be different, where the different employments require
different abilities, as when courage is wanting for one, judgment for
the other, there they should be allotted to different persons; but when
it is evident, that it is impossible to oblige those who have arms
in their hands, and can insist on their own terms, to be always under
command; there these different employments should be trusted to one
person; for those who have arms in their hands have it in their option
whether they will or will not assume the supreme power: to these two
(namely, those who have courage and judgment) the government must be
entrusted; but not in the same manner, but as nature directs; what
requires courage to the young, what requires judgment to the old; for
with the young is courage, with the old is wisdom: thus each will be
allotted the part they are fit for according to their different merits.
It is also necessary that the landed property should belong to these
men; for it is necessary that the citizens should be rich, and these are
the men proper for citizens; for no mechanic ought to be admitted to the
rights of a citizen, nor any other sort of people whose employment is
not entirely noble, honourable, and virtuous; this is evident from the
principle we at first set out with; for to be happy it is necessary
to be virtuous; and no one should say that a city is happy while he
considers only one part of its citizens, but for that purpose he ought
to examine into all of them. It is evident, therefore, that the landed
property should belong to these, though it may be necessary for them to
have husbandmen, either slaves, barbarians, or servants. There remains
of the different classes of the people whom we have enumerated, the
priests, for these evidently compose a rank by themselves; for neither
are they to be reckoned amongst the husbandmen nor the mechanics; for
reverence to the gods is highly becoming every state: and since the
citizens have been divided into orders, the military and the council,
and it is proper to offer due worship to the gods, and since it is
necessary that those who are employed in their service should have
nothing else to do, let the business of the priesthood be allotted
to those who are in years. We have now shown what is necessary to the
existence of a city, and of what parts it consists, and that husbandmen,
mechanic, and mercenary servants are necessary to a city; but that
the parts of it are soldiers and sailors, and that these are always
different from those, but from each other only occasionally.




CHAPTER X


It seems neither now nor very lately to have been known [1329b] to those
philosophers who have made politics their study, that a city ought to
be divided by families into different orders of men; and that the
husbandmen and soldiers should be kept separate from each other;
which custom is even to this day preserved in Egypt and in Crete; also
Sesostris having founded it in Egypt, Minos in Crete. Common meals seem
also to have been an ancient regulation, and to have been established
in Crete during the reign of Minos, and in a still more remote period
in Italy; for those who are the best judges in that country say that
one Italus being king of AEnotria., from whom the people, changing their
names, were called Italians instead of AEnotrians, and that part of
Europe was called Italy which is bounded by the Scylletic Gulf on the
one side and the Lametic on the other, the distance between which
is about half a day's journey. This Italus, they relate, made the
AEnotrians, who were formerly shepherds, husbandmen, and gave them
different laws from what they had before, and to have been the first who
established common meals, for which reason some of his descendants still
use them, and observe some of his laws. The Opici inhabit that part
which lies towards the Tyrrhenian Sea, who both now are and formerly
were called Ausonians. The Chones inhabited the part toward Iapigia and
the Ionian Sea which is called Syrtis. These Chones were descended
from the AEnotrians. Hence arose the custom of common meals, but the
separation of the citizens into different families from Egypt: for the
reign of Sesostris is of much higher antiquity than that of Minos. As
we ought to think that most other things were found out in a long, nay,
even in a boundless time (reason teaching us that want would make us
first invent that which was necessary, and, when that was obtained, then
those things which were requisite for the conveniences and ornament of
life), so should we conclude the same with respect to a political state;
now everything in Egypt bears the marks of the most remote antiquity,
for these people seem to be the most ancient of all others, and to have
acquired laws and political order; we should therefore make a proper
use of what is told us of them, and endeavour to find out what they have
omitted. We have already said, that the landed property ought to belong
to the military and those who partake of the government of the state;
and that therefore the husbandmen should be a separate order of people;
and how large and of what nature the country ought to be: we will first
treat of the division of the land, and of the husbandmen, how many and
of what sort they ought to be; since we by no means hold that property
ought to be common, as some persons have said, only thus far, in
friendship, it [1330a] should be their custom to let no citizen want
subsistence. As to common meals, it is in general agreed that they are
proper in well-regulated cities; my reasons for approving of them shall
be mentioned hereafter: they are what all the citizens ought to partake
of; but it will not be easy for the poor, out of what is their own, to
furnish as much as they are ordered to do, and supply their own house
besides. The expense also of religious worship should be defrayed by the
whole state. Of necessity therefore the land ought to be divided into
two parts, one of which should belong to the community in general, the
other to the individuals separately; and each of these parts should
again be subdivided into two: half of that which belongs to the public
should be appropriated to maintain the worship of the gods, the other
half to support the common meals. Half of that which belongs to the
individuals should be at the extremity of the country, the other half
near the city, so that these two portions being allotted to each person,
all would partake of land in both places, which would be both equal and
right; and induce them to act in concert with greater harmony in any war
with their neighbours: for when the land is not divided in this manner,
one party neglects the inroads of the enemy on the borders, the other
makes it a matter of too much consequence and more than is necessary;
for which reason in some places there is a law which forbids the
inhabitants of the borders to have any vote in the council when they are
debating upon a war which is made against them as their private interest
might prevent their voting impartially. Thus therefore the country ought
to be divided and for the reasons before mentioned. Could one have one's
choice, the husbandmen should by all means be slaves, not of the same
nation, or men of any spirit; for thus they would be laborious in
their business, and safe from attempting any novelties: next to these
barbarian servants are to be preferred, similar in natural disposition
to these we have already mentioned. Of these, let those who are
to cultivate the private property of the individual belong to that
individual, and those who are to cultivate the public territory belong
to the public. In what manner these slaves ought to be used, and for
what reason it is very proper that they should have the promise of their
liberty made them, as a reward for their services, shall be mentioned
hereafter.




CHAPTER XI


We have already mentioned, that both the city and all the country should
communicate both with the sea and the continent as much as possible.
There are these four things which we should be particularly desirous of
in the position of the city with respect to itself: in the first place,
health is to be consulted as the first thing necessary: now a city
which fronts the east and receives the winds which blow from thence is
esteemed most healthful; next to this that which has a northern position
is to be preferred, as best in winter. It should next be contrived that
it may have a proper situation for the business of government and for
defence in war: that in war the citizens may [1330b] have easy access
to it; but that it may be difficult of access to, and hardly to be taken
by, the enemy. In the next place particularly, that there may be plenty
of water, and rivers near at hand: but if those cannot be found, very
large cisterns must be prepared to save rain-water, so that there may
be no want of it in case they should be driven into the town in time of
war. And as great care should be taken of the health of the inhabitants,
the first thing to be attended to is, that the city should have a good
situation and a good position; the second is, that they may have good
water to drink; and this not be negligently taken care of; for what
we chiefly and most frequently use for the support of the body must
principally influence the health of it; and this influence is what the
air and water naturally have: for which reason in all wise governments
the waters ought to be appropriated to different purposes, and if they
are not equally good, and if there is not a plenty of necessary water,
that which is to drink should be separated from that which is for other
uses. As to fortified places, what is proper for some governments is
not proper for all; as, for instance, a lofty citadel is proper for a
monarchy and an oligarchy; a city built upon a plain suits a democracy;
neither of these for an aristocracy, but rather many strong places. As
to the form of private houses, those are thought to be best and most
useful for their different purposes which are distinct and separate
from each other, and built in the modern manner, after the plan of
Hippodamus: but for safety in time of war, on the contrary, they should
be built as they formerly were; for they were such that strangers could
not easily find their way out of them, and the method of access to
them such as an enemy could with difficulty find out if he proposed
to besiege them. A city therefore should have both these sorts of
buildings, which may easily be contrived if any one will so regulate
them as the planters do their rows of vines; not that the buildings
throughout the city should be detached from each other, only in some
parts of it; thus elegance and safety will be equally consulted. With
respect to walls, those who say that a courageous people ought not to
have any, pay too much respect to obsolete notions; particularly as
we may see those who pride themselves therein continually confuted by
facts. It is indeed disreputable for those who are equal, or nearly so,
to the enemy, to endeavour to take refuge within their walls--but since
it very often happens, that those who make the attack are too powerful
for the bravery and courage of those few who oppose them to resist,
if you would not suffer the calamities of war and the insolence of the
enemy, it must be thought the part of a good soldier to seek for safety
under the shelter and protection of walls more especially since so many
missile weapons and machines have been most ingeniously invented to
besiege cities with. Indeed to neglect surrounding a city with a wall
would be similar to choosing a country which is easy of access to an
enemy, or levelling the eminences of it; or as if an individual should
not have a wall to his house lest it should be thought that the owner
of it was a coward: nor should this be left unconsidered, that those who
have a city surrounded with walls may act both ways, either as if it had
or as if it had not; but where it has not they cannot do this. If this
is true, it is not only necessary to have walls, but care must be taken
that they may be a proper ornament to the city, as well as a defence
in time of war; not only according to the old methods, but the modern
improvements also: for as those who make offensive war endeavour by
every way possible to gain advantages over their adversaries, so should
those who are upon the defensive employ all the means already known, and
such new ones as philosophy can invent, to defend themselves: for those
who are well prepared are seldom first attacked.




CHAPTER XII


As the citizens in general are to eat at public tables in certain
companies, and it is necessary that the walls should have bulwarks and
towers in proper places and at proper distances, it is evident that
it will be very necessary to have some of these in the towers; let the
buildings for this purpose be made the ornaments of the walls. As to
temples for public worship, and the hall for the public tables of
the chief magistrates, they ought to be built in proper places, and
contiguous to each other, except those temples which the law or the
oracle orders to be separate from all other buildings; and let these be
in such a conspicuous eminence, that they may have every advantage of
situation, and in the neighbourhood of that part of the city which
is best fortified. Adjoining to this place there ought to be a large
square, like that which they call in Thessaly The Square of Freedom, in
which nothing is permitted to be bought or sold; into which no mechanic
nor husbandman, nor any such person, should be permitted to enter,
unless commanded by the magistrates. It will also be an ornament to this
place if the gymnastic exercises of the elders are performed in it. It
is also proper, that for performing these exercises the citizens should
be divided into distinct classes, according to their ages, and that the
young persons should have proper officers to be with them, and that the
seniors should be with the magistrates; for having them before their
eyes would greatly inspire true modesty and ingenuous fear. There ought
to be another square [1331b] separate from this for buying and selling,
which should be so situated as to be commodious for the reception
of goods both by sea and land. As the citizens may be divided into
magistrates and priests, it is proper that the public tables of
the priests should be in buildings near the temples. Those of the
magistrates who preside over contracts, indictments, and such-like, and
also over the markets, and the public streets near the square, or some
public way, I mean the square where things are bought and sold; for I
intended the other for those who are at leisure, and this for necessary
business. The same order which I have directed here should be observed
also in the country; for there also their magistrates such as the
surveyors of the woods and overseers of the grounds, must necessarily
have their common tables and their towers, for the purpose of protection
against an enemy. There ought also to be temples erected at proper
places, both to the gods and the heroes; but it is unnecessary to dwell
longer and most minutely on these particulars--for it is by no means
difficult to plan these things, it is rather so to carry them into
execution; for the theory is the child of our wishes, but the practical
part must depend upon fortune; for which reason we shall decline saying
anything farther upon these subjects.




CHAPTER XIII


We will now show of what numbers and of what sort of people a government
ought to consist, that the state may be happy and well administered.
As there are two particulars on which the excellence and perfection of
everything depend, one of these is, that the object and end proposed
should be proper; the other, that the means to accomplish it should be
adapted to that purpose; for it may happen that these may either agree
or disagree with each other; for the end we propose may be good, but in
taking the means to obtain it we may err; at other times we may have
the right and proper means in our power, but the end may be bad,
and sometimes we may mistake in both; as in the art of medicine the
physician does not sometimes know in what situation the body ought to
be, to be healthy; nor what to do to procure the end he aims at. In
every art and science, therefore, we should be master of this knowledge,
namely, the proper end, and the means to obtain it. Now it is evident
that all persons are desirous to live well and be happy; but that some
have the means thereof in their own power, others not; and this either
through nature [1332a] or fortune; for many ingredients are necessary to
a happy life; but fewer to those who are of a good than to those who are
of a bad disposition. There are others who continually have the means
of happiness in their own power, but do not rightly apply them. Since
we propose to inquire what government is best, namely, that by which
a state may be best administered, and that state is best administered
where the people are the happiest, it is evident that happiness is a
thing we should not be unacquainted with. Now, I have already said in
my treatise on Morals (if I may here make any use of what I have there
shown), that happiness consists in the energy and perfect practice of
virtue; and this not relatively, but simply; I mean by relatively, what
is necessary in some certain circumstances; by simply, what is good and
fair in itself: of the first sort are just punishments, and restraints
in a just cause; for they arise from virtue and are necessary, and on
that account are virtuous; though it is more desirable that neither any
state nor any individual should stand in need of them; but those actions
which are intended either to procure honour or wealth are simply good;
the others eligible only to remove an evil; these, on the contrary, are
the foundation and means of relative good. A worthy man indeed will bear
poverty, disease, and other unfortunate accidents with a noble mind;
but happiness consists in the contrary to these (now we have already
determined in our treatise on Morals, that he is a man of worth who
considers what is good because it is virtuous as what is simply good; it
is evident, therefore, that all the actions of such a one must be worthy
and simply good): this has led some persons to conclude, that the cause
of happiness was external goods; which would be as if any one should
suppose that the playing well upon the lyre was owing to the instrument,
and not to the art. It necessarily follows from what has been said,
that some things should be ready at hand and others procured by the
legislator; for which reason in founding a city we earnestly wish that
there may be plenty of those things which are supposed to be under the
dominion of fortune (for some things we admit her to be mistress over);
but for a state to be worthy and great is not only the work of fortune
but of knowledge and judgment also. But for a state to be worthy it is
necessary that those citizens which are in the administration should
be worthy also; but as in our city every citizen is to be so, we must
consider how this may be accomplished; for if this is what every one
could be, and not some individuals only, it would be more desirable; for
then it would follow, that what might be done by one might be done
by all. Men are worthy and good three ways; by nature, by custom, by
reason. In the first place, a man ought to be born a man, and not any
other animal; that is to say, he ought to have both a body and soul; but
it avails not to be only born [1332b] with some things, for custom
makes great alterations; for there are some things in nature capable of
alteration either way which are fixed by custom, either for the better
or the worse. Now, other animals live chiefly a life of nature; and in
very few things according to custom; but man lives according to reason
also, which he alone is endowed with; wherefore he ought to make all
these accord with each other; for if men followed reason, and were
persuaded that it was best to obey her, they would act in many respects
contrary to nature and custom. What men ought naturally to be, to make
good members of a community, I have already determined; the rest of
this discourse therefore shall be upon education; for some things are
acquired by habit, others by hearing them.




CHAPTER XIV


As every political community consists of those who govern and of those
who are governed, let us consider whether during the continuance of
their lives they ought to be the same persons or different; for it
is evident that the mode of education should be adapted to this
distinction. Now, if one man differed from another as much, as we
believe, the gods and heroes differ from men: in the first place, being
far their superiors in body; and, secondly, in the soul: so that the
superiority of the governors over the governed might be evident beyond
a doubt, it is certain that it would be better for the one always to
govern, the other always to be governed: but, as this is not easy to
obtain, and kings are not so superior to those they govern as Scylax
informs us they are in India, it is evident that for many reasons it is
necessary that all in their turns should both govern and be governed:
for it is just that those who are equal should have everything alike;
and it is difficult for a state to continue which is founded in
injustice; for all those in the country who are desirous of innovation
will apply themselves to those who are under the government of the rest,
and such will be their numbers in the state, that it will be impossible
for the magistrates to get the better of them. But that the governors
ought to excel the governed is beyond a doubt; the legislator therefore
ought to consider how this shall be, and how it may be contrived that
all shall have their equal share in the administration. Now, with
respect to this it will be first said, that nature herself has directed
us in our choice, laying down the selfsame thing when she has made some
young, others old: the first of whom it becomes to obey, the latter
to command; for no one when he is young is offended at his being under
government, or thinks himself too good for it; more especially when he
considers that he himself shall receive the same honours which he
pays when he shall arrive at a proper age. In some respects it must be
acknowledged that the governors and the governed are the same, in others
they are different; it is therefore necessary that their education
should be in [1333a] some respect the same, in others different: as they
say, that he will be a good governor who has first learnt to obey. Now
of governments, as we have already said, some are instituted for the
sake of him who commands; others for him who obeys: of the first sort is
that of the master over the servant; of the latter, that of freemen over
each other. Now some things which are commanded differ from others; not
in the business, but in the end proposed thereby: for which reason many
works, even of a servile nature, are not disgraceful for young freemen
to perform; for many things which are ordered to be done are not
honourable or dishonourable so much in their own nature as in the end
which is proposed, and the reason for which they are undertaken. Since
then we have determined, that the virtue of a good citizen and good
governor is the same as of a good man; and that every one before he
commands should have first obeyed, it is the business of the legislator
to consider how his citizens may be good men, what education is
necessary to that purpose, and what is the final object of a good life.
The soul of man may be divided into two parts; that which has reason in
itself, and that which hath not, but is capable of obeying its dictates:
and according to the virtues of these two parts a man is said to be
good: but of those virtues which are the ends, it will not be difficult
for those to determine who adopt the division I have already given; for
the inferior is always for the sake of the superior; and this is equally
evident both in the works of art as well as in those of nature; but that
is superior which has reason. Reason itself also is divided into
two parts, in the manner we usually divide it; the theoretic and the
practical; which division therefore seems necessary for this part also:
the same analogy holds good with respect to actions; of which those
which are of a superior nature ought always to be chosen by those who
have it in their power; for that is always most eligible to every one
which will procure the best ends. Now life is divided into labour and
rest, war and peace; and of what we do the objects are partly necessary
and useful, partly noble: and we should give the same preference to
these that we do to the different parts of the soul and its actions,
as war to procure peace; labour, rest; and the useful, the noble. The
politician, therefore, who composes a body of laws ought to extend his
views to everything; the different parts of the soul and their actions;
more particularly to those things which are of a superior nature and
ends; and, in the same manner, to the lives of men and their different
actions.

They ought to be fitted both for labour and war, but rather [1333b] for
rest and peace; and also to do what is necessary and useful, but rather
what is fair and noble. It is to those objects that the education of the
children ought to tend, and of all the youths who want instruction. All
the Grecian states which now seem best governed, and the legislators who
founded those states, appear not to have framed their polity with a view
to the best end, or to every virtue, in their laws and education; but
eagerly to have attended to what is useful and productive of gain: and
nearly of the same opinion with these are some persons who have written
lately, who, by praising the Lacedaemonian state, show they approve of
the intention of the legislator in making war and victory the end of
his government. But how contrary to reason this is, is easily proved by
argument, and has already been proved by facts (but as the generality of
men desire to have an extensive command, that they may have everything
desirable in the greater abundance; so Thibron and others who have
written on that state seem to approve of their legislator for having
procured them an extensive command by continually enuring them to
all sorts of dangers and hardships): for it is evident, since the
Lacedemonians have now no hope that the supreme power will be in their
own hand, that neither are they happy nor was their legislator wise.
This also is ridiculous, that while they preserved an obedience to their
laws, and no one opposed their being governed by them, they lost the
means of being honourable: but these people understand not rightly
what sort of government it is which ought to reflect honour on the
legislator; for a government of freemen is nobler than despotic power,
and more consonant to virtue. Moreover, neither should a city be thought
happy, nor should a legislator be commended, because he has so trained
the people as to conquer their neighbours; for in this there is a
great inconvenience: since it is evident that upon this principle every
citizen who can will endeavour to procure the supreme power in his own
city; which crime the Lacedaemonians accuse Pausanias of, though he
enjoyed such great honours.

Such reasoning and such laws are neither political, useful nor true: but
a legislator ought to instil those laws on the minds of men which are
most useful for them, both in their public and private capacities. The
rendering a people fit for war, that they may enslave their inferiors
ought not to be the care of the legislator; but that they may not
themselves be reduced to slavery by others. In [1334a] the next place,
he should take care that the object of his government is the safety
of those who are under it, and not a despotism over all: in the third
place, that those only are slaves who are fit to be only so. Reason
indeed concurs with experience in showing that all the attention which
the legislator pays to the business of war, and all other rules which
he lays down, should have for their object rest and peace; since most
of those states (which we usually see) are preserved by war; but, after
they have acquired a supreme power over those around them, are ruined;
for during peace, like a sword, they lose their brightness: the fault of
which lies in the legislator, who never taught them how to be at rest.




CHAPTER XV


As there is one end common to a man both as an individual and a citizen,
it is evident that a good man and a good citizen must have the same
object in view; it is evident that all the virtues which lead to rest
are necessary; for, as we have often said, the end of war is peace, of
labour, rest; but those virtues whose object is rest, and those also
whose object is labour, are necessary for a liberal life and rest; for
we want a supply of many necessary things that we may be at rest. A city
therefore ought to be temperate, brave, and patient; for, according to
the proverb, "Rest is not for slaves;" but those who cannot bravely face
danger are the slaves of those who attack them. Bravery, therefore, and
patience are necessary for labour, philosophy for rest, and temperance
and justice in both; but these chiefly in time of peace and rest; for
war obliges men to be just and temperate; but the enjoyment of pleasure,
with the rest of peace, is more apt to produce insolence; those indeed
who are easy in their circumstances, and enjoy everything that can
make them happy, have great occasion for the virtues of temperance and
justice. Thus if there are, as the poets tell us, any inhabitants in
the happy isles, to these a higher degree of philosophy, temperance, and
justice will be necessary, as they live at their ease in the full plenty
of every sensual pleasure. It is evident, therefore, that these virtues
are necessary in every state that would be happy or worthy; for he who
is worthless can never enjoy real good, much less is he qualified to
be at rest; but can appear good only by labour and being at war, but
in peace and at rest the meanest of creatures. For which reason virtue
should not be cultivated as the Lacedaemonians did; for they did not
differ from others in their opinion concerning the supreme good, but in
[1334b] imagining this good was to be procured by a particular virtue;
but since there are greater goods than those of war, it is evident
that the enjoyment of those which are valuable in themselves should be
desired, rather than those virtues which are useful in war; but how and
by what means this is to be acquired is now to be considered. We have
already assigned three causes on which it will depend; nature, custom,
and reason, arid shown what sort of men nature must produce for this
purpose; it remains then that we determine which we shall first begin by
in education, reason or custom, for these ought always to preserve the
most entire harmony with each other; for it may happen that reason may
err from the end proposed, and be corrected by custom. In the first
place, it is evident that in this as in other things, its beginning
or production arises from some principle, and its end also arises from
another principle, which is itself an end. Now, with us, reason and
intelligence are the end of nature; our production, therefore, and our
manners ought to be accommodated to both these. In the next place, as
the soul and the body are two distinct things, so also we see that the
soul is divided into two parts, the reasoning and not-reasoning, with
their habits which are two in number, one belonging to each, namely
appetite and intelligence; and as the body is in production before the
soul, so is the not-reasoning part of the soul before the reasoning; and
this is evident; for anger, will and desire are to be seen in children
nearly as soon as they are born; but reason and intelligence spring up
as they grow to maturity. The body, therefore, necessarily demands our
care before the soul; next the appetites for the sake of the mind; the
body for the sake of the soul.




CHAPTER XVI


If then the legislator ought to take care that the bodies of the
children are as perfect as possible, his first attention ought to be
given to matrimony; at what time and in what situation it is proper that
the citizens should engage in the nuptial contract. Now, with respect
to this alliance, the legislator ought both to consider the parties and
their time of life, that they may grow old at the same part of time, and
that their bodily powers may not be different; that is to say, the man
being able to have children, but the woman too old to bear them; or, on
the contrary, the woman be young enough to produce children, but the man
too old to be a father; for from such a situation discords and disputes
continually arise. In the next place, with respect to the succession of
children, there ought not to be too great an interval of time between
them and their parents; for when there is, the parent can receive no
benefit from his child's affection, or the child any advantage from his
father's protection; [1335a] neither should the difference in years be
too little, as great inconveniences may arise from it; as it prevents
that proper reverence being shown to a father by a boy who considers him
as nearly his equal in age, and also from the disputes it occasions in
the economy of the family. But, to return from this digression, care
ought to be taken that the bodies of the children may be such as will
answer the expectations of the legislator; this also will be affected
by the same means. Since season for the production of children is
determined (not exactly, but to speak in general), namely, for the man
till seventy years, and the woman till fifty, the entering into the
marriage state, as far as time is concerned, should be regulated by
these periods. It is extremely bad for the children when the father
is too young; for in all animals whatsoever the parts of the young are
imperfect, and are more likely to be productive of females than males,
and diminutive also in size; the same thing of course necessarily holds
true in men; as a proof of this you may see in those cities where the
men and women usually marry very young, the people in general are very
small and ill framed; in child-birth also the women suffer more, and
many of them die. And thus some persons tell us the oracle of Traezenium
should be explained, as if it referred to the many women who were
destroyed by too early marriages, and not their gathering their fruits
too soon. It is also conducive to temperance not to marry too soon; for
women who do so are apt to be intemperate. It also prevents the bodies
of men from acquiring their full size if they marry before their growth
is completed; for this is the determinate period, which prevents any
further increase; for which reason the proper time for a woman to marry
is eighteen, for a man thirty-seven, a little more or less; for when
they marry at that time their bodies are in perfection, and they will
also cease to have children at a proper time; and moreover with respect
to the succession of the children, if they have them at the time which
may reasonably be expected, they will be just arriving into perfection
when their parents are sinking down under the load of seventy years.
And thus much for the time which is proper for marriage; but moreover
a proper season of the year should be observed, as many persons do now,
and appropriate the winter for this business. The married couple ought
also to regard the precepts of physicians and naturalists, each of whom
have treated on these [1335b] subjects. What is the fit disposition of
the body will be better mentioned when we come to speak of the education
of the child; we will just slightly mention a few particulars. Now,
there is no occasion that any one should have the habit of body of a
wrestler to be either a good citizen, or to enjoy a good constitution,
or to be the father of healthy children; neither should he be infirm or
too much dispirited by misfortunes, but between both these. He ought to
have a habit of labour, but not of too violent labour; nor should that
be confined to one object only, as the wrestler's is; but to such things
as are proper for freemen. These things are equally necessary both for
men and women. Women with child should also take care that their diet is
not too sparing, and that they use sufficient exercise; which it will be
easy for the legislator to effect if he commands them once every day
to repair to the worship of the gods who are supposed to preside over
matrimony. But, contrary to what is proper for the body, the mind ought
to be kept as tranquil as possible; for as plants partake of the nature
of the soil, so does the child receive much of the disposition of the
mother. With respect to the exposing or bringing up of children, let
it be a law, that nothing imperfect or maimed shall be brought
up,.......... As the proper time has been pointed out for a man and a
woman to enter into the marriage state, so also let us determine
how long it is advantageous for the community that they should have
children; for as the children of those who are too young are imperfect
both in body and mind, so also those whose parents are too old are weak
in both: while therefore the body continues in perfection, which (as
some poets say, who reckon the different periods of life by sevens)
is till fifty years, or four or five more, the children may be equally
perfect; but when the parents are past that age it is better they should
have no more. With respect to any connection between a man and a woman,
or a woman and a man, when either of the parties are betrothed, let
it be held in utter detestation [1336a] on any pretext whatsoever;
but should any one be guilty of such a thing after the marriage is
consummated, let his infamy be as great as his guilt deserves.




CHAPTER XVII


When a child is born it must be supposed that the strength of its body
will depend greatly upon the quality of its food. Now whoever will
examine into the nature of animals, and also observe those people who
are very desirous their children should acquire a warlike habit, will
find that they feed them chiefly with milk, as being best accommodated
to their bodies, but without wine, to prevent any distempers: those
motions also which are natural to their age are very serviceable; and
to prevent any of their limbs from being crooked, on account of their
extreme ductility, some people even now use particular machines that
their bodies may not be distorted. It is also useful to enure them to
the cold when they are very little; for this is very serviceable for
their health; and also to enure them to the business of war; for which
reason it is customary with many of the barbarians to dip their children
in rivers when the water is cold; with others to clothe them very
slightly, as among the Celts; for whatever it is possible to accustom
children to, it is best to accustom them to it at first, but to do it
by degrees: besides, boys have naturally a habit of loving the cold, on
account of the heat. These, then, and such-like things ought to be the
first object of our attention: the next age to this continues till
the child is five years old; during which time it is best to teach him
nothing at all, not even necessary labour, lest it should hinder his
growth; but he should be accustomed to use so much motion as not to
acquire a lazy habit of body; which he will get by various means and by
play also: his play also ought to be neither illiberal nor too laborious
nor lazy. Their governors and preceptors also should take care what sort
of tales and stories it may be proper for them to hear; for all these
ought to pave the way for their future instruction: for which reason
the generality of their play should be imitations of what they are
afterwards to do seriously. They too do wrong who forbid by laws
the disputes between boys and their quarrels, for they contribute to
increase their growth--as they are a sort of exercise to the body:
for the struggles of the heart and the compression of the spirits give
strength to those who labour, which happens to boys in their disputes.
The preceptors also ought to have an eye upon their manner of life, and
those with whom they converse; and to take care that they are never
in the company of slaves. At this time and till they are seven [1336b]
years old it is necessary that they should be educated at home. It
is also very proper to banish, both from their hearing and sight,
everything which is illiberal and the like. Indeed it is as much the
business of the legislator as anything else, to banish every indecent
expression out of the state: for from a permission to speak whatever is
shameful, very quickly arises the doing it, and this particularly with
young people: for which reason let them never speak nor hear any such
thing: but if it appears that any freeman has done or said anything that
is forbidden before he is of age to be thought fit to partake of the
common meals, let him be punished by disgrace and stripes; but if a
person above that age does so, let him be treated as you would a
slave, on account of his being infamous. Since we forbid his speaking
everything which is forbidden, it is necessary that he neither sees
obscene stories nor pictures; the magistrates therefore are to take care
that there are no statues or pictures of anything of this nature, except
only to those gods to whom the law permits them, and to which the law
allows persons of a certain age to pay their devotions, for themselves,
their wives, and children. It should also be illegal for young persons
to be present either at iambics or comedies before they are arrived at
that age when they are allowed to partake of the pleasures of the table:
indeed a good education will preserve them from all the evils which
attend on these things. We have at present just touched upon this
subject; it will be our business hereafter, when we properly come to
it, to determine whether this care of children is unnecessary, or,
if necessary, in what manner it must be done; at present we have only
mentioned it as necessary. Probably the saying of Theodoras, the tragic
actor, was not a bad one: That he would permit no one, not even the
meanest actor, to go upon the stage before him, that he might first
engage the ear of the audience. The same thing happens both in our
connections with men and things: what we meet with first pleases best;
for which reason children should be kept strangers to everything which
is bad, more particularly whatsoever is loose and offensive to good
manners. When five years are accomplished, the two next may be very
properly employed in being spectators of those exercises they will
afterwards have to learn. There are two periods into which education
ought to be divided, according to the age of the child; the one is from
his being seven years of age to the time of puberty; the other from
thence till he is one-and-twenty: for those who divide ages by the
number seven [1337a] are in general wrong: it is much better to follow
the division of nature; for every art and every instruction is intended
to complete what nature has left defective: we must first consider if
any regulation whatsoever is requisite for children; in the next place,
if it is advantageous to make it a common care, or that every one should
act therein as he pleases, which is the general practice in most cities;
in the third place, what it ought to be.




BOOK VIII




CHAPTER I


No one can doubt that the magistrate ought greatly to interest himself
in the care of youth; for where it is neglected it is hurtful to the
city, for every state ought to be governed according to its particular
nature; for the form and manners of each government are peculiar to
itself; and these, as they originally established it, so they usually
still preserve it. For instance, democratic forms and manners a
democracy; oligarchic, an oligarchy: but, universally, the best manners
produce the best government. Besides, as in every business and art there
are some things which men are to learn first and be made accustomed to,
which are necessary to perform their several works; so it is evident
that the same thing is necessary in the practice of virtue. As there is
one end in view in every city, it is evident that education ought to be
one and the same in each; and that this should be a common care, and
not the individual's, as it now is, when every one takes care of his own
children separately; and their instructions are particular also, each
person teaching them as they please; but what ought to be engaged in
ought to be common to all. Besides, no one ought to think that any
citizen belongs to him in particular, but to the state in general; for
each one is a part of the state, and it is the natural duty of each part
to regard the good of the whole: and for this the Lacedaemonians may be
praised; for they give the greatest attention to education, and make
it public. It is evident, then, that there should be laws concerning
education, and that it should be public.




CHAPTER II


What education is, and how children ought to be instructed, is what
should be well known; for there are doubts concerning the business of
it, as all people do not agree in those things they would have a child
taught, both with respect to their improvement in virtue and a happy
life: nor is it clear whether the object of it should be to improve
the reason or rectify the morals. From the present mode of education
we cannot determine with certainty to which men incline, whether to
instruct a child in what will be useful to him in life; or what tends to
virtue, and what is excellent: for all these things have their separate
defenders. As to virtue, there is no particular [1337b] in which they
all agree: for as all do not equally esteem all virtues, it reasonably
follows that they will not cultivate the same. It is evident that what
is necessary ought to be taught to all: but that which is necessary
for one is not necessary for all; for there ought to be a distinction
between the employment of a freeman and a slave. The first of these
should be taught everything useful which will not make those who know
it mean. Every work is to be esteemed mean, and every art and every
discipline which renders the body, the mind, or the understanding of
freemen unfit for the habit and practice of virtue: for which reason all
those arts which tend to deform the body are called mean, and all those
employments which are exercised for gain; for they take off from the
freedom of the mind and render it sordid. There are also some liberal
arts which are not improper for freemen to apply to in a certain degree;
but to endeavour to acquire a perfect skill in them is exposed to the
faults I have just mentioned; for there is a great deal of difference
in the reason for which any one does or learns anything: for it is not
illiberal to engage in it for one's self, one's friend, or in the cause
of virtue; while, at the same time, to do it for the sake of another
may seem to be acting the part of a servant and a slave. The mode of
instruction which now prevails seems to partake of both parts.




CHAPTER III


There are four things which it is usual to teach children--reading,
gymnastic exercises, and music, to which (in the fourth place) some add
painting. Reading and painting are both of them of singular use in life,
and gymnastic exercises, as productive of courage. As to music, some
persons may doubt, as most persons now use it for the sake of pleasure:
but those who originally made it part of education did it because,
as has been already said, nature requires that we should not only be
properly employed, but to be able to enjoy leisure honourably: for this
(to repeat what I have already said) is of all things the principal.
But, though both labour and rest are necessary, yet the latter is
preferable to the first; and by all means we ought to learn what we
should do when at rest: for we ought not to employ that time at play;
for then play would be the necessary business of our lives. But if this
cannot be, play is more necessary for those who labour than those who
are at rest: for he who labours requires relaxation; which play will
supply: for as labour is attended with pain and continued exertion, it
is necessary that play should be introduced, under proper regulations,
as a medicine: for such an employment of the mind is a relaxation to
it, and eases with pleasure. [1338a] Now rest itself seems to partake of
pleasure, of happiness, and an agreeable life: but this cannot be theirs
who labour, but theirs who are at rest; for he who labours, labours for
the sake of some end which he has not: but happiness is an end which
all persons think is attended with pleasure and not with pain: but all
persons do not agree in making this pleasure consist in the same thing;
for each one has his particular standard, correspondent to his own
habits; but the best man proposes the best pleasure, and that which
arises from the noblest actions. But it is evident, that to live a life
of rest there are some things which a man must learn and be instructed
in; and that the object of this learning and this instruction centres in
their acquisition: but the learning and instruction which is given for
labour has for its object other things; for which reason the ancients
made music a part of education; not as a thing necessary, for it is not
of that nature, nor as a thing useful, as reading, in the common course
of life, or for managing of a family, or for learning anything as useful
in public life. Painting also seems useful to enable a man to judge
more accurately of the productions of the finer arts: nor is it like
the gymnastic exercises, which contribute to health and strength; for
neither of these things do we see produced by music; there remains for
it then to be the employment of our rest, which they had in view who
introduced it; and, thinking it a proper employment for freemen, to them
they allotted it; as Homer sings:

   "How right to call Thalia to the feast:" 

and of some others he says:

   "The bard was call'd, to ravish every ear:"

and, in another place, he makes Ulysses say the happiest part of man's
life is

   "When at the festal board, in order plac'd, They hear the song."

It is evident, then, that there is a certain education in which a child
may be instructed, not as useful nor as necessary, but as noble and
liberal: but whether this is one or more than one, and of what sort they
are, and how to be taught, shall be considered hereafter: we are now got
so far on our way as to show that we have the testimony of the ancients
in our favour, by what they have delivered down upon education--for
music makes this plain. Moreover, it is necessary to instruct children
in what is useful, not only on account of its being useful in itself,
as, for instance, to learn to read, but also as the means of acquiring
other different sorts of instruction: thus they should be instructed
in painting, not only to prevent their being mistaken in purchasing
pictures, or in buying or selling of vases, but rather as it makes
[1338b] them judges of the beauties of the human form; for to be always
hunting after the profitable ill agrees with great and freeborn
souls. As it is evident whether a boy should be first taught morals or
reasoning, and whether his body or his understanding should be first
cultivated, it is plain that boys should be first put under the care of
the different masters of the gymnastic arts, both to form their bodies
and teach them their exercises.




CHAPTER IV


Now those states which seem to take the greatest care of their
children's education, bestow their chief attention on wrestling, though
it both prevents the increase of the body and hurts the form of it. This
fault the Lacedaemonians did not fall into, for they made their children
fierce by painful labour, as chiefly useful to inspire them with
courage: though, as we have already often said, this is neither the
only thing nor the principal thing necessary to attend to; and even with
respect to this they may not thus attain their end; for we do not find
either in other animals, or other nations, that courage necessarily
attends the most cruel, but rather the milder, and those who have the
dispositions of lions: for there are many people who are eager both
to kill men and to devour human flesh, as the Achaeans and Heniochi in
Pontus, and many others in Asia, some of whom are as bad, others worse
than these, who indeed live by tyranny, but are men of no courage. Nay,
we know that the Lacedaemonians themselves, while they continued those
painful labours, and were superior to all others (though now they are
inferior to many, both in war and gymnastic exercises), did not acquire
their superiority by training their youth to these exercises,
but because those who were disciplined opposed those who were not
disciplined at all. What is fair and honourable ought then to take place
in education of what is fierce and cruel: for it is not a wolf, nor any
other wild beast, which will brave any noble danger, but rather a good
man. So that those who permit boys to engage too earnestly in these
exercises, while they do not take care to instruct them in what is
necessary to do, to speak the real truth, render them mean and vile,
accomplished only in one duty of a citizen, and in every other respect,
as reason evinces, good for nothing. Nor should we form our judgments
from past events, but from what we see at present: for now they have
rivals in their mode of education, whereas formerly they had not. That
gymnastic exercises are useful, and in what manner, is admitted; for
during youth it is very proper to go through a course of those which
are most gentle, omitting that violent diet and those painful exercises
which are prescribed as necessary; that they may not prevent the growth
of the body: and it is no small proof that they have this effect, that
amongst the Olympic candidates we can scarce find two or three who have
gained a victory both when boys and men: because the necessary exercises
they went through when young deprived them of their strength. When they
have allotted three years from the time of puberty to other parts of
education, they are then of a proper age to submit to labour and a
regulated diet; for it is impossible for the mind and body both to
labour at the same time, as they are productive of contrary evils to
each other; the labour of the body preventing the progress of the mind,
and the mind of the body.




CHAPTER V


With respect to music we have already spoken a little in a doubtful
manner upon this subject. It will be proper to go over again more
particularly what we then said, which may serve as an introduction to
what any other person may choose to offer thereon; for it is no easy
matter to distinctly point out what power it has, nor on what accounts
one should apply it, whether as an amusement and refreshment, as sleep
or wine; as these are nothing serious, but pleasing, and the killers of
care, as Euripides says; for which reason they class in the same order
and use for the same purpose all these, namely, sleep, wine, and music,
to which some add dancing; or shall we rather suppose that music tends
to be productive of virtue, having a power, as the gymnastic exercises
have to form the body in a certain way, to influence the manners so as
to accustom its professors to rejoice rightly? or shall we say, that it
is of any service in the conduct of life, and an assistant to prudence?
for this also is a third property which has been attributed to it. Now
that boys are not to be instructed in it as play is evident; for those
who learn don't play, for to learn is rather troublesome; neither is
it proper to permit boys at their age to enjoy perfect leisure; for to
cease to improve is by no means fit for what is as yet imperfect; but it
may be thought that the earnest attention of boys in this art is for
the sake of that amusement they will enjoy when they come to be men and
completely formed; but, if this is the case, why are they themselves
to learn it, and not follow the practice of the kings of the Medes and
Persians, who enjoy the pleasure of music by hearing others play, and
being shown its beauties by them; for of necessity those must be
better skilled therein who make this science their particular study
and business, than those who have only spent so much time at it as was
sufficient just to learn the principles of it. But if this is a reason
for a child's being taught anything, they ought also to learn the art of
cookery, but this is absurd. The same doubt occurs if music has a power
of improving the manners; for why should they on this account themselves
learn it, and not reap every advantage of regulating the passions or
forming a judgment [1339b] on the merits of the performance by hearing
others, as the Lacedaemonians; for they, without having ever learnt
music, are yet able to judge accurately what is good and what is
bad; the same reasoning may be applied if music is supposed to be the
amusement of those who live an elegant and easy life, why should they
learn themselves, and not rather enjoy the benefit of others' skill.
Let us here consider what is our belief of the immortal gods in this
particular. Now we find the poets never represent Jupiter himself as
singing and playing; nay, we ourselves treat the professors of these
arts as mean people, and say that no one would practise them but a
drunkard or a buffoon. But probably we may consider this subject more
at large hereafter. The first question is, whether music is or is not
to make a part of education? and of those three things which have
been assigned as its proper employment, which is the right? Is it to
instruct, to amuse, or to employ the vacant hours of those who live at
rest? or may not all three be properly allotted to it? for it appears
to partake of them all; for play is necessary for relaxation, and
relaxation pleasant, as it is a medicine for that uneasiness which
arises from labour. It is admitted also that a happy life must be an
honourable one, and a pleasant one too, since happiness consists in both
these; and we all agree that music is one of the most pleasing things,
whether alone or accompanied with a voice; as Musseus says, "Music's the
sweetest joy of man;" for which reason it is justly admitted into every
company and every happy life, as having the power of inspiring joy.
So that from this any one may suppose that it is necessary to instruct
young persons in it; for all those pleasures which are harmless are not
only conducive to the final end of life, but serve also as relaxations;
and, as men are but rarely in the attainment of that final end, they
often cease from their labour and apply to amusement, with no further
view than to acquire the pleasure attending it. It is therefore useful
to enjoy such pleasures as these. There are some persons who make play
and amusement their end, and probably that end has some pleasure annexed
to it, but not what should be; but while men seek the one they accept
the other for it; because there is some likeness in human actions to the
end; for the end is pursued for the sake of nothing else that attends
it; but for itself only; and pleasures like these are sought for, not
on account of what follows them, but on account of what has gone before
them, as labour and grief; for which reason they seek for happiness in
these sort of pleasures; and that this is the reason any one may easily
perceive. That music should be pursued, not on this account only, but
also as it is very serviceable during the hours of relaxation from
labour, probably no [1340a] one doubts; we should also inquire whether
besides this use it may not also have another of nobler nature--and we
ought not only to partake of the common pleasure arising from it (which
all have the sensation of, for music naturally gives pleasure, therefore
the use of it is agreeable to all ages and all dispositions); but also
to examine if it tends anything to improve our manners and our souls.
And this will be easily known if we feel our dispositions any way
influenced thereby; and that they are so is evident from many other
instances, as well as the music at the Olympic games; and this
confessedly fills the soul with enthusiasm; but enthusiasm is an
affection of the soul which strongly agitates the disposition. Besides,
all those who hear any imitations sympathise therewith; and this when
they are conveyed even without rhythm or verse. Moreover, as music is
one of those things which are pleasant, and as virtue itself consists in
rightly enjoying, loving, and hating, it is evident that we ought not
to learn or accustom ourselves to anything so much as to judge right and
rejoice in honourable manners and noble actions. But anger and mildness,
courage and modesty, and their contraries, as well as all other
dispositions of the mind, are most naturally imitated by music and
poetry; which is plain by experience, for when we hear these our very
soul is altered; and he who is affected either with joy or grief by the
imitation of any objects, is in very nearly the same situation as if he
was affected by the objects themselves; thus, if any person is pleased
with seeing a statue of any one on no other account but its beauty, it
is evident that the sight of the original from whence it was taken
would also be pleasing; now it happens in the other senses there is no
imitation of manners; that is to say, in the touch and the taste; in the
objects of sight, a very little; for these are merely representations of
things, and the perceptions which they excite are in a manner common
to all. Besides, statues and paintings are not properly imitations of
manners, but rather signs and marks which show the body is affected by
some passion. However, the difference is not great, yet young men ought
not to view the paintings of Pauso, but of Polygnotus, or any other
painter or statuary who expresses manners. But in poetry and music there
are imitations of manners; and this is evident, for different harmonies
differ from each other so much by nature, that those who hear them are
differently affected, and are not in the same disposition of mind when
one is performed as when another is; the one, for instance, occasions
grief 13406 and contracts the soul, as the mixed Lydian: others soften
the mind, and as it were dissolve the heart: others fix it in a firm
and settled state, such is the power of the Doric music only; while the
Phrygian fills the soul with enthusiasm, as has been well described by
those who have written philosophically upon this part of education; for
they bring examples of what they advance from the things themselves. The
same holds true with respect to rhythm; some fix the disposition, others
occasion a change in it; some act more violently, others more liberally.
From what has been said it is evident what an influence music has over
the disposition of the mind, and how variously it can fascinate it:
and if it can do this, most certainly it is what youth ought to be
instructed in. And indeed the learning of music is particularly adapted
to their disposition; for at their time of life they do not willingly
attend to anything which is not agreeable; but music is naturally one
of the most agreeable things; and there seems to be a certain connection
between harmony and rhythm; for which reason some wise men held the soul
itself to be harmony; others, that it contains it.




CHAPTER VI


We will now determine whether it is proper that children should be
taught to sing, and play upon any instrument, which we have before made
a matter of doubt. Now, it is well known that it makes a great deal of
difference when you would qualify any one in any art, for the person
himself to learn the practical part of it; for it is a thing very
difficult, if not impossible, for a man to be a good judge of what he
himself cannot do. It is also very necessary that children should have
some employment which will amuse them; for which reason the rattle of
Archytas seems well contrived, which they give children to play with,
to prevent their breaking those things which are about the house; for
at their age they cannot sit still: this therefore is well adapted to
infants, as instruction ought to be their rattle as they grow up; hence
it is evident that they should be so taught music as to be able to
practise it. Nor is it difficult to say what is becoming or unbecoming
of their age, or to answer the objections which some make to this
employment as mean and low. In the first place, it is necessary for them
to practise, that they may be judges of the art: for which reason this
should be done when they are young; but when they are grown older the
practical part may be dropped; while they will still continue judges of
what is excellent in the art, and take a proper pleasure therein, from
the knowledge they acquired of it in their youth. As to the censure
which some persons throw upon music, as something mean and low, it is
not difficult to answer that, if we will but consider how far we propose
those who are to be educated so as to become good citizens should be
instructed in this art, [1341a] and what music and what rhythms they
should be acquainted with; and also what instruments they should play
upon; for in these there is probably a difference. Such then is the
proper answer to that censure: for it must be admitted, that in some
cases nothing can prevent music being attended, to a certain degree,
with the bad effects which are ascribed to it; it is therefore clear
that the learning of it should never prevent the business of riper
years; nor render the body effeminate, and unfit for the business of war
or the state; but it should be practised by the young, judged of by the
old. That children may learn music properly, it is necessary that they
should not be employed in those parts of it which are the objects of
dispute between the masters in that science; nor should they perform
such pieces as are wondered at from the difficulty of their execution;
and which, from being first exhibited in the public games, are now
become a part of education; but let them learn so much of it as to be
able to receive proper pleasure from excellent music and rhythms; and
not that only which music must make all animals feel, and also slaves
and boys, but more. It is therefore plain what instruments they should
use; thus, they should never be taught to play upon the flute, or any
other instrument which requires great skill, as the harp or the like,
but on such as will make them good judges of music, or any other
instruction: besides, the flute is not a moral instrument, but rather
one that will inflame the passions, and is therefore rather to be used
when the soul is to be animated than when instruction is intended. Let
me add also, that there is something therein which is quite contrary to
what education requires; as the player on the flute is prevented from
speaking: for which reason our forefathers very properly forbade the use
of it to youth and freemen, though they themselves at first used it; for
when their riches procured them greater leisure, they grew more animated
in the cause of virtue; and both before and after the Median war their
noble actions so exalted their minds that they attended to every part of
education; selecting no one in particular, but endeavouring to collect
the whole: for which reason they introduced the flute also, as one
of the instruments they were to learn to play on. At Lacedaemon the
choregus himself played on the flute; and it was so common at Athens
that almost every freeman understood it, as is evident from the tablet
which Thrasippus dedicated when he was choregus; but afterwards they
rejected it as dangerous; having become better judges of what tended to
promote virtue and what did not. For the same reason many of the ancient
instruments were thrown aside, as the dulcimer and the lyre; as also
those which were to inspire those who played on them with pleasure, and
which required a nice finger and great skill to play well on. What the
ancients tell us, by way of fable, of the flute is indeed very rational;
namely, that after Minerva had found it, she threw it away: nor are they
wrong who say that the goddess disliked it for deforming the face of him
who played thereon: not but that it is more probable that she rejected
it as the knowledge thereof contributed nothing to the improvement of
the mind. Now, we regard Minerva as the inventress of arts and sciences.
As we disapprove of a child's being taught to understand instruments,
and to play like a master (which we would have confined to those who are
candidates for the prize in that science; for they play not to improve
themselves in virtue, but to please those who hear them, and gratify
their importunity); therefore we think the practice of it unfit for
freemen; but then it should be confined to those who are paid for doing
it; for it usually gives people sordid notions, for the end they have
in view is bad: for the impertinent spectator is accustomed to make them
change their music; so that the artists who attend to him regulate their
bodies according to his motions.




CHAPTER VII


We are now to enter into an inquiry concerning harmony and rhythm;
whether all sorts of these are to be employed in education, or whether
some peculiar ones are to be selected; and also whether we should
give the same directions to those who are engaged in music as part of
education, or whether there is something different from these two.
Now, as all music consists in melody and rhythm, we ought not to be
unacquainted with the power which each of these has in education; and
whether we should rather choose music in which melody prevails, or
rhythm: but when I consider how many things have been well written upon
these subjects, not only by some musicians of the present age, but also
by some philosophers who are perfectly skilled in that part of music
which belongs to education; we will refer those who desire a very
particular knowledge therein to those writers, and shall only treat
of it in general terms, without descending to particulars. Melody is
divided by some philosophers, whose notions we approve of, into moral,
practical, and that which fills the mind with enthusiasm: they also
allot to each of these a particular kind of harmony which naturally
corresponds therewith: and we say that music should not be applied to
one purpose only, but many; both for instruction and purifying the soul
(now I use the word purifying at present without any explanation, but
shall speak more at large of it in my Poetics); and, in the third place,
as an agreeable manner of spending the time and a relaxation from the
uneasiness of the mind. [1342a] It is evident that all harmonies are to
be used; but not for all purposes; but the most moral in education: but
to please the ear, when others play, the most active and enthusiastic;
for that passion which is to be found very strong in some souls is to be
met with also in all; but the difference in different persons consists
in its being in a less or greater degree, as pity, fear, and enthusiasm
also; which latter is so powerful in some as to overpower the soul: and
yet we see those persons, by the application of sacred music to soothe
their mind, rendered as sedate and composed as if they had employed
the art of the physician: and this must necessarily happen to the
compassionate, the fearful, and all those who are subdued by their
passions: nay, all persons, as far as they are affected with those
passions, admit of the same cure, and are restored to tranquillity with
pleasure. In the same manner, all music which has the power of purifying
the soul affords a harmless pleasure to man. Such, therefore, should be
the harmony and such the music which those who contend with each other
in the theatre should exhibit: but as the audience is composed of two
sorts of people, the free and the well-instructed, the rude the mean
mechanics, and hired servants, and a long collection of the like, there
must be some music and some spectacles to please and soothe them; for as
their minds are as it were perverted from their natural habits, so
also is there an unnatural harmony, and overcharged music which is
accommodated to their taste: but what is according to nature gives
pleasure to every one, therefore those who are to contend upon the
theatre should be allowed to use this species of music. But in education
ethic melody and ethic harmony should be used, which is the Doric, as we
have already said, or any other which those philosophers who are skilful
in that music which is to be employed in education shall approve of.
But Socrates, in Plato's Republic, is very wrong when he [1342b] permits
only the Phrygian music to be used as well as the Doric, particularly as
amongst other instruments he banishes the flute; for the Phrygian music
has the same power in harmony as the flute has amongst the instruments;
for they are both pathetic and raise the mind: and this the practice
of the poets proves; for in their bacchanal songs, or whenever they
describe any violent emotions of the mind, the flute is the instrument
they chiefly use: and the Phrygian harmony is most suitable to these
subjects. Now, that the dithyrambic measure is Phrygian is allowed by
general consent; and those who are conversant in studies of this sort
bring many proofs of it; as, for instance, when Philoxenus endeavoured
to compose dithyrambic music for Doric harmony, he naturally fell back
again into Phrygian, as being fittest for that purpose; as every one
indeed agrees, that the Doric music is most serious, and fittest to
inspire courage: and, as we always commend the middle as being between
the two extremes, and the Doric has this relation with respect to other
harmonies, it is evident that is what the youth ought to be instructed
in. There are two things to be taken into consideration, both what is
possible and what is proper; every one then should chiefly endeavour to
attain those things which contain both these qualities: but this is to
be regulated by different times of life; for instance, it is not easy
for those who are advanced in years to sing such pieces of music as
require very high notes, for nature points out to them those which are
gentle and require little strength of voice (for which reason some who
are skilful in music justly find fault with Socrates for forbidding the
youth to be instructed in gentle harmony; as if, like wine, it would
make them drunk, whereas the effect of that is to render men bacchanals,
and not make them languid): these therefore are what should employ those
who are grown old. Moreover, if there is any harmony which is proper for
a child's age, as being at the same time elegant and instructive, as the
Lydian of all others seems chiefly to be-These then are as it were the
three boundaries of education, moderation, possibility, and decorum.﻿Every art, and every science reduced to a teachable form, and in like
manner every action and moral choice, aims, it is thought, at some good:
for which reason a common and by no means a bad description of the Chief
Good is, "that which all things aim at."

Now there plainly is a difference in the Ends proposed: for in some
cases they are acts of working, and in others certain works or tangible
results beyond and beside the acts of working: and where there are
certain Ends beyond and beside the actions, the works are in their
nature better than the acts of working. Again, since actions and arts
and sciences are many, the Ends likewise come to be many: of the healing
art, for instance, health; of the ship-building art, a vessel; of
the military art, victory; and of domestic management, wealth; are
respectively the Ends.

And whatever of such actions, arts, or sciences range under some one
faculty (as under that of horsemanship the art of making bridles, and
all that are connected with the manufacture of horse-furniture in
general; this itself again, and every action connected with war, under
the military art; and in the same way others under others), in all such,
the Ends of the master-arts are more choice-worthy than those ranging
under them, because it is with a view to the former that the latter are
pursued.

(And in this comparison it makes no difference whether the acts of
working are themselves the Ends of the actions, or something further
beside them, as is the case in the arts and sciences we have been just
speaking of.)

[Sidenote: II] Since then of all things which may be done there is some
one End which we desire for its own sake, and with a view to which we
desire everything else; and since we do not choose in all instances with
a further End in view (for then men would go on without limit, and so
the desire would be unsatisfied and fruitless), this plainly must be the
Chief Good, _i.e._ the best thing of all.

Surely then, even with reference to actual life and conduct, the
knowledge of it must have great weight; and like archers, with a mark in
view, we shall be more likely to hit upon what is right: and if so, we
ought to try to describe, in outline at least, what it is and of which
of the sciences and faculties it is the End.

[Sidenote: 1094b] Now one would naturally suppose it to be the End
of that which is most commanding and most inclusive: and to this
description, [Greek: _politikae_] plainly answers: for this it is that
determines which of the sciences should be in the communities, and which
kind individuals are to learn, and what degree of proficiency is to be
required. Again; we see also ranging under this the most highly esteemed
faculties, such as the art military, and that of domestic management,
and Rhetoric. Well then, since this uses all the other practical
sciences, and moreover lays down rules as to what men are to do, and
from what to abstain, the End of this must include the Ends of the rest,
and so must be _The Good_ of Man. And grant that this is the same to
the individual and to the community, yet surely that of the latter is
plainly greater and more perfect to discover and preserve: for to do
this even for a single individual were a matter for contentment; but to
do it for a whole nation, and for communities generally, were more noble
and godlike.


[Sidenote: III] Such then are the objects proposed by our treatise,
which is of the nature of [Greek: _politikae_]: and I conceive I shall
have spoken on them satisfactorily, if they be made as distinctly clear
as the nature of the subject-matter will admit: for exactness must not
be looked for in all discussions alike, any more than in all works
of handicraft. Now the notions of nobleness and justice, with the
examination of which _politikea_ is concerned, admit of variation
and error to such a degree, that they are supposed by some to exist
conventionally only, and not in the nature of things: but then, again,
the things which are allowed to be goods admit of a similar error,
because harm comes to many from them: for before now some have perished
through wealth, and others through valour.

We must be content then, in speaking of such things and from such data,
to set forth the truth roughly and in outline; in other words, since
we are speaking of general matter and from general data, to draw also
conclusions merely general. And in the same spirit should each person
receive what we say: for the man of education will seek exactness so far
in each subject as the nature of the thing admits, it being plainly much
the same absurdity to put up with a mathematician who tries to persuade
instead of proving, and to demand strict demonstrative reasoning of a
Rhetorician.

[Sidenote: 1095a] Now each man judges well what he knows, and of these
things he is a good judge: on each particular matter then he is a good
judge who has been instructed in _it_, and in a general way the man of
general mental cultivation.

Hence the young man is not a fit student of Moral Philosophy, for he has
no experience in the actions of life, while all that is said presupposes
and is concerned with these: and in the next place, since he is apt to
follow the impulses of his passions, he will hear as though he heard
not, and to no profit, the end in view being practice and not mere
knowledge.

And I draw no distinction between young in years, and youthful in temper
and disposition: the defect to which I allude being no direct result of
the time, but of living at the beck and call of passion, and following
each object as it rises. For to them that are such the knowledge comes
to be unprofitable, as to those of imperfect self-control: but, to
those who form their desires and act in accordance with reason, to have
knowledge on these points must be very profitable.

Let thus much suffice by way of preface on these three points, the
student, the spirit in which our observations should be received, and
the object which we propose.

[Sidenote: IV] And now, resuming the statement with which we commenced,
since all knowledge and moral choice grasps at good of some kind or
another, what good is that which we say [Greek: _politikai_] aims at?
or, in other words, what is the highest of all the goods which are the
objects of action?

So far as name goes, there is a pretty general agreement: for HAPPINESS
both the multitude and the refined few call it, and "living well" and
"doing well" they conceive to be the same with "being happy;" but about
the Nature of this Happiness, men dispute, and the multitude do not in
their account of it agree with the wise. For some say it is some one of
those things which are palpable and apparent, as pleasure or wealth or
honour; in fact, some one thing, some another; nay, oftentimes the same
man gives a different account of it; for when ill, he calls it health;
when poor, wealth: and conscious of their own ignorance, men admire
those who talk grandly and above their comprehension. Some again held it
to be something by itself, other than and beside these many good things,
which is in fact to all these the cause of their being good.

Now to sift all the opinions would be perhaps rather a fruitless task;
so it shall suffice to sift those which are most generally current, or
are thought to have some reason in them.

[Sidenote: 1095b] And here we must not forget the difference between
reasoning from principles, and reasoning to principles: for with good
cause did Plato too doubt about this, and inquire whether the right road
is from principles or to principles, just as in the racecourse from the
judges to the further end, or _vice versâ_.

Of course, we must begin with what is known; but then this is of two
kinds, what we _do_ know, and what we _may_ know: perhaps then as
individuals we must begin with what we _do_ know. Hence the necessity
that he should have been well trained in habits, who is to study, with
any tolerable chance of profit, the principles of nobleness and justice
and moral philosophy generally. For a principle is a matter of fact,
and if the fact is sufficiently clear to a man there will be no need in
addition of the reason for the fact. And he that has been thus trained
either has principles already, or can receive them easily: as for him
who neither has nor can receive them, let him hear his sentence from
Hesiod:

  He is best of all who of himself conceiveth all things;
  Good again is he too who can adopt a good suggestion;
  But whoso neither of himself conceiveth nor hearing from
  another
  Layeth it to heart;--he is a useless man.

[Sidenote: V] But to return from this digression.

Now of the Chief Good (_i.e._ of Happiness) men seem to form their
notions from the different modes of life, as we might naturally expect:
the many and most low conceive it to be pleasure, and hence they are
content with the life of sensual enjoyment. For there are three lines of
life which stand out prominently to view: that just mentioned, and the
life in society, and, thirdly, the life of contemplation.

Now the many are plainly quite slavish, choosing a life like that of
brute animals: yet they obtain some consideration, because many of the
great share the tastes of Sardanapalus. The refined and active again
conceive it to be honour: for this may be said to be the end of the life
in society: yet it is plainly too superficial for the object of our
search, because it is thought to rest with those who pay rather than
with him who receives it, whereas the Chief Good we feel instinctively
must be something which is our own, and not easily to be taken from us.

And besides, men seem to pursue honour, that they may *[Sidenote: 1096a]
believe themselves to be good: for instance, they seek to be honoured
by the wise, and by those among whom they are known, and for virtue:
clearly then, in the opinion at least of these men, virtue is higher
than honour. In truth, one would be much more inclined to think this
to be the end of the life in society; yet this itself is plainly not
sufficiently final: for it is conceived possible, that a man possessed
of virtue might sleep or be inactive all through his life, or, as a
third case, suffer the greatest evils and misfortunes: and the man who
should live thus no one would call happy, except for mere disputation's
sake.

And for these let thus much suffice, for they have been treated of at
sufficient length in my Encyclia.

A third line of life is that of contemplation, concerning which we shall
make our examination in the sequel.

As for the life of money-making, it is one of constraint, and wealth
manifestly is not the good we are seeking, because it is for use, that
is, for the sake of something further: and hence one would rather
conceive the forementioned ends to be the right ones, for men rest
content with them for their own sakes. Yet, clearly, they are not the
objects of our search either, though many words have been wasted on
them. So much then for these.

[Sidenote: VI] Again, the notion of one Universal Good (the same, that
is, in all things), it is better perhaps we should examine, and discuss
the meaning of it, though such an inquiry is unpleasant, because they
are friends of ours who have introduced these [Greek: _eidae_]. Still
perhaps it may appear better, nay to be our duty where the safety of the
truth is concerned, to upset if need be even our own theories, specially
as we are lovers of wisdom: for since both are dear to us, we are bound
to prefer the truth. Now they who invented this doctrine of [Greek:
_eidae_], did not apply it to those things in which they spoke of
priority and posteriority, and so they never made any [Greek: _idea_] of
numbers; but good is predicated in the categories of Substance, Quality,
and Relation; now that which exists of itself, _i.e._ Substance, is
prior in the nature of things to that which is relative, because this
latter is an off-shoot, as it were, and result of that which is; on
their own principle then there cannot be a common [Greek: _idea_] in the
case of these.

In the next place, since good is predicated in as many ways as there are
modes of existence [for it is predicated in the category of Substance,
as God, Intellect--and in that of Quality, as The Virtues--and in that
of Quantity, as The Mean--and in that of Relation, as The Useful--and in
that of Time, as Opportunity--and in that of Place, as Abode; and
other such like things], it manifestly cannot be something common and
universal and one in all: else it would not have been predicated in all
the categories, but in one only.

[Sidenote: 1096b] Thirdly, since those things which range under one
[Greek: _idea_] are also under the cognisance of one science, there
would have been, on their theory, only one science taking cognisance of
all goods collectively: but in fact there are many even for those which
range under one category: for instance, of Opportunity or Seasonableness
(which I have before mentioned as being in the category of Time), the
science is, in war, generalship; in disease, medical science; and of the
Mean (which I quoted before as being in the category of Quantity), in
food, the medical science; and in labour or exercise, the gymnastic
science. A person might fairly doubt also what in the world they mean by
very-this that or the other, since, as they would themselves allow, the
account of the humanity is one and the same in the very-Man, and in any
individual Man: for so far as the individual and the very-Man are both
Man, they will not differ at all: and if so, then very-good and any
particular good will not differ, in so far as both are good. Nor will it
do to say, that the eternity of the very-good makes it to be more good;
for what has lasted white ever so long, is no whiter than what lasts but
for a day.

No. The Pythagoreans do seem to give a more credible account of the
matter, who place "One" among the goods in their double list of goods
and bads: which philosophers, in fact, Speusippus seems to have
followed.

But of these matters let us speak at some other time. Now there is
plainly a loophole to object to what has been advanced, on the plea that
the theory I have attacked is not by its advocates applied to all good:
but those goods only are spoken of as being under one [Greek: idea],
which are pursued, and with which men rest content simply for their own
sakes: whereas those things which have a tendency to produce or preserve
them in any way, or to hinder their contraries, are called good because
of these other goods, and after another fashion. It is manifest then
that the goods may be so called in two senses, the one class for their
own sakes, the other because of these.

Very well then, let us separate the independent goods from the
instrumental, and see whether they are spoken of as under one [Greek:
idea]. But the question next arises, what kind of goods are we to call
independent? All such as are pursued even when separated from other
goods, as, for instance, being wise, seeing, and certain pleasures and
honours (for these, though we do pursue them with some further end in
view, one would still place among the independent goods)? or does it
come in fact to this, that we can call nothing independent good except
the [Greek: idea], and so the concrete of it will be nought?

If, on the other hand, these are independent goods, then we shall
require that the account of the goodness be the same clearly in all,
just as that of the whiteness is in snow and white lead. But how stands
the fact? Why of honour and wisdom and pleasure the accounts are
distinct and different in so far as they are good. The Chief Good then
is not something common, and after one [Greek: idea].

But then, how does the name come to be common (for it is not seemingly a
case of fortuitous equivocation)? Are different individual things called
good by virtue of being from one source, or all conducing to one end, or
rather by way of analogy, for that intellect is to the soul as sight to
the body, and so on? However, perhaps we ought to leave these questions
now, for an accurate investigation of them is more properly the business
of a different philosophy. And likewise respecting the [Greek: idea]:
for even if there is some one good predicated in common of all things
that are good, or separable and capable of existing independently,
manifestly it cannot be the object of human action or attainable by Man;
but we are in search now of something that is so.

It may readily occur to any one, that it would be better to attain a
knowledge of it with a view to such concrete goods as are attainable and
practical, because, with this as a kind of model in our hands, we shall
the better know what things are good for us individually, and when we
know them, we shall attain them.

Some plausibility, it is true, this argument possesses, but it is
contradicted by the facts of the Arts and Sciences; for all these,
though aiming at some good, and seeking that which is deficient, yet
pretermit the knowledge of it: now it is not exactly probable that all
artisans without exception should be ignorant of so great a help as this
would be, and not even look after it; neither is it easy to see wherein
a weaver or a carpenter will be profited in respect of his craft by
knowing the very-good, or how a man will be the more apt to effect cures
or to command an army for having seen the [Greek: idea] itself. For
manifestly it is not health after this general and abstract fashion
which is the subject of the physician's investigation, but the health
of Man, or rather perhaps of this or that man; for he has to heal
individuals.--Thus much on these points.


VII

And now let us revert to the Good of which we are in search: what can it
be? for manifestly it is different in different actions and arts: for it
is different in the healing art and in the art military, and similarly
in the rest. What then is the Chief Good in each? Is it not "that for
the sake of which the other things are done?" and this in the healing
art is health, and in the art military victory, and in that of
house-building a house, and in any other thing something else; in short,
in every action and moral choice the End, because in all cases men do
everything else with a view to this. So that if there is some one End of
all things which are and may be done, this must be the Good proposed by
doing, or if more than one, then these.

Thus our discussion after some traversing about has come to the same
point which we reached before. And this we must try yet more to clear
up.

Now since the ends are plainly many, and of these we choose some with
a view to others (wealth, for instance, musical instruments, and, in
general, all instruments), it is clear that all are not final: but the
Chief Good is manifestly something final; and so, if there is some one
only which is final, this must be the object of our search: but if
several, then the most final of them will be it.

Now that which is an object of pursuit in itself we call more final than
that which is so with a view to something else; that again which is
never an object of choice with a view to something else than those which
are so both in themselves and with a view to this ulterior object: and
so by the term "absolutely final," we denote that which is an object of
choice always in itself, and never with a view to any other.

And of this nature Happiness is mostly thought to be, for this we choose
always for its own sake, and never with a view to anything further:
whereas honour, pleasure, intellect, in fact every excellence we choose
for their own sakes, it is true (because we would choose each of these
even if no result were to follow), but we choose them also with a view
to happiness, conceiving that through their instrumentality we shall be
happy: but no man chooses happiness with a view to them, nor in fact
with a view to any other thing whatsoever.

The same result is seen to follow also from the notion of
self-sufficiency, a quality thought to belong to the final good. Now
by sufficient for Self, we mean not for a single individual living a
solitary life, but for his parents also and children and wife, and,
in general, friends and countrymen; for man is by nature adapted to a
social existence. But of these, of course, some limit must be fixed: for
if one extends it to parents and descendants and friends' friends,
there is no end to it. This point, however, must be left for future
investigation: for the present we define that to be self-sufficient
"which taken alone makes life choice-worthy, and to be in want of
nothing;" now of such kind we think Happiness to be: and further, to
be most choice-worthy of all things; not being reckoned with any other
thing, for if it were so reckoned, it is plain we must then allow it,
with the addition of ever so small a good, to be more choice-worthy than
it was before: because what is put to it becomes an addition of so much
more good, and of goods the greater is ever the more choice-worthy.

So then Happiness is manifestly something final and self-sufficient,
being the end of all things which are and may be done.

But, it may be, to call Happiness the Chief Good is a mere truism, and
what is wanted is some clearer account of its real nature. Now this
object may be easily attained, when we have discovered what is the work
of man; for as in the case of flute-player, statuary, or artisan of any
kind, or, more generally, all who have any work or course of action,
their Chief Good and Excellence is thought to reside in their work, so
it would seem to be with man, if there is any work belonging to him.

Are we then to suppose, that while carpenter and cobbler have certain
works and courses of action, Man as Man has none, but is left by Nature
without a work? or would not one rather hold, that as eye, hand, and
foot, and generally each of his members, has manifestly some special
work; so too the whole Man, as distinct from all these, has some work of
his own?

What then can this be? not mere life, because that plainly is shared
with him even by vegetables, and we want what is peculiar to him. We
must separate off then the life of mere nourishment and growth, and next
will come the life of sensation: but this again manifestly is common to
horses, oxen, and every animal. There remains then a kind of life of
the Rational Nature apt to act: and of this Nature there are two parts
denominated Rational, the one as being obedient to Reason, the other as
having and exerting it. Again, as this life is also spoken of in two
ways, we must take that which is in the way of actual working, because
this is thought to be most properly entitled to the name. If then the
work of Man is a working of the soul in accordance with reason, or at
least not independently of reason, and we say that the work of any given
subject, and of that subject good of its kind, are the same in kind (as,
for instance, of a harp-player and a good harp-player, and so on in
every case, adding to the work eminence in the way of excellence; I
mean, the work of a harp-player is to play the harp, and of a good
harp-player to play it well); if, I say, this is so, and we assume the
work of Man to be life of a certain kind, that is to say a working of
the soul, and actions with reason, and of a good man to do these things
well and nobly, and in fact everything is finished off well in the way
of the excellence which peculiarly belongs to it: if all this is so,
then the Good of Man comes to be "a working of the Soul in the way of
Excellence," or, if Excellence admits of degrees, in the way of the best
and most perfect Excellence.

And we must add, in a complete life; for as it is not one swallow or one
fine day that makes a spring, so it is not one day or a short time that
makes a man blessed and happy.

Let this then be taken for a rough sketch of the Chief Good: since it
is probably the right way to give first the outline, and fill it in
afterwards. And it would seem that any man may improve and connect
what is good in the sketch, and that time is a good discoverer and
co-operator in such matters: it is thus in fact that all improvements
in the various arts have been brought about, for any man may fill up a
deficiency.

You must remember also what has been already stated, and not seek
for exactness in all matters alike, but in each according to the
subject-matter, and so far as properly belongs to the system. The
carpenter and geometrician, for instance, inquire into the right line in
different fashion: the former so far as he wants it for his work, the
latter inquires into its nature and properties, because he is concerned
with the truth.

So then should one do in other matters, that the incidental matters may
not exceed the direct ones.

And again, you must not demand the reason either in all things
alike, because in some it is sufficient that the fact has been well
demonstrated, which is the case with first principles; and the fact is
the first step, _i.e._ starting-point or principle.

And of these first principles some are obtained by induction, some by
perception, some by a course of habituation, others in other different
ways. And we must try to trace up each in their own nature, and take
pains to secure their being well defined, because they have
great influence on what follows: it is thought, I mean, that the
starting-point or principle is more than half the whole matter, and that
many of the points of inquiry come simultaneously into view thereby.


VIII

We must now inquire concerning Happiness, not only from our conclusion
and the data on which our reasoning proceeds, but likewise from what
is commonly said about it: because with what is true all things which
really are are in harmony, but with that which is false the true very
soon jars.

Now there is a common division of goods into three classes; one being
called external, the other two those of the soul and body respectively,
and those belonging to the soul we call most properly and specially
good. Well, in our definition we assume that the actions and workings of
the soul constitute Happiness, and these of course belong to the soul.
And so our account is a good one, at least according to this opinion,
which is of ancient date, and accepted by those who profess philosophy.
Rightly too are certain actions and workings said to be the end, for
thus it is brought into the number of the goods of the soul instead of
the external. Agreeing also with our definition is the common notion,
that the happy man lives well and does well, for it has been stated by
us to be pretty much a kind of living well and doing well.

But further, the points required in Happiness are found in combination
in our account of it.

For some think it is virtue, others practical wisdom, others a kind of
scientific philosophy; others that it is these, or else some one of
them, in combination with pleasure, or at least not independently of it;
while others again take in external prosperity.

Of these opinions, some rest on the authority of numbers or antiquity,
others on that of few, and those men of note: and it is not likely that
either of these classes should be wrong in all points, but be right at
least in some one, or even in most.

Now with those who assert it to be Virtue (Excellence), or some kind of
Virtue, our account agrees: for working in the way of Excellence surely
belongs to Excellence.

And there is perhaps no unimportant difference between conceiving of
the Chief Good as in possession or as in use, in other words, as a mere
state or as a working. For the state or habit may possibly exist in a
subject without effecting any good, as, for instance, in him who is
asleep, or in any other way inactive; but the working cannot so, for it
will of necessity act, and act well. And as at the Olympic games it is
not the finest and strongest men who are crowned, but they who enter the
lists, for out of these the prize-men are selected; so too in life, of
the honourable and the good, it is they who act who rightly win the
prizes.

Their life too is in itself pleasant: for the feeling of pleasure is a
mental sensation, and that is to each pleasant of which he is said to be
fond: a horse, for instance, to him who is fond of horses, and a sight
to him who is fond of sights: and so in like manner just acts to him who
is fond of justice, and more generally the things in accordance with
virtue to him who is fond of virtue. Now in the case of the multitude of
men the things which they individually esteem pleasant clash, because
they are not such by nature, whereas to the lovers of nobleness those
things are pleasant which are such by nature: but the actions in
accordance with virtue are of this kind, so that they are pleasant both
to the individuals and also in themselves.

So then their life has no need of pleasure as a kind of additional
appendage, but involves pleasure in itself. For, besides what I have
just mentioned, a man is not a good man at all who feels no pleasure in
noble actions, just as no one would call that man just who does not feel
pleasure in acting justly, or liberal who does not in liberal actions,
and similarly in the case of the other virtues which might be
enumerated: and if this be so, then the actions in accordance with
virtue must be in themselves pleasurable. Then again they are certainly
good and noble, and each of these in the highest degree; if we are to
take as right the judgment of the good man, for he judges as we have
said.

Thus then Happiness is most excellent, most noble, and most pleasant,
and these attributes are not separated as in the well-known Delian
inscription--

"Most noble is that which is most just, but best is health; And
naturally most pleasant is the obtaining one's desires."

For all these co-exist in the best acts of working: and we say that
Happiness is these, or one, that is, the best of them.

Still it is quite plain that it does require the addition of external
goods, as we have said: because without appliances it is impossible, or
at all events not easy, to do noble actions: for friends, money, and
political influence are in a manner instruments whereby many things
are done: some things there are again a deficiency in which mars
blessedness; good birth, for instance, or fine offspring, or even
personal beauty: for he is not at all capable of Happiness who is very
ugly, or is ill-born, or solitary and childless; and still less perhaps
supposing him to have very bad children or friends, or to have lost good
ones by death. As we have said already, the addition of prosperity of
this kind does seem necessary to complete the idea of Happiness; hence
some rank good fortune, and others virtue, with Happiness.

And hence too a question is raised, whether it is a thing that can be
learned, or acquired by habituation or discipline of some other kind, or
whether it comes in the way of divine dispensation, or even in the way
of chance.

Now to be sure, if anything else is a gift of the Gods to men, it is
probable that Happiness is a gift of theirs too, and specially because
of all human goods it is the highest. But this, it may be, is a question
belonging more properly to an investigation different from ours: and it
is quite clear, that on the supposition of its not being sent from the
Gods direct, but coming to us by reason of virtue and learning of a
certain kind, or discipline, it is yet one of the most Godlike things;
because the prize and End of virtue is manifestly somewhat most
excellent, nay divine and blessed.

It will also on this supposition be widely participated, for it may
through learning and diligence of a certain kind exist in all who have
not been maimed for virtue.

And if it is better we should be happy thus than as a result of chance,
this is in itself an argument that the case is so; because those things
which are in the way of nature, and in like manner of art, and of every
cause, and specially the best cause, are by nature in the best way
possible: to leave them to chance what is greatest and most noble would
be very much out of harmony with all these facts.

The question may be determined also by a reference to our definition of
Happiness, that it is a working of the soul in the way of excellence or
virtue of a certain kind: and of the other goods, some we must have to
begin with, and those which are co-operative and useful are given by
nature as instruments.

These considerations will harmonise also with what we said at the
commencement: for we assumed the End of [Greek Text: poletikae] to be
most excellent: now this bestows most care on making the members of the
community of a certain character; good that is and apt to do what is
honourable.

With good reason then neither ox nor horse nor any other brute animal
do we call happy, for none of them can partake in such working: and for
this same reason a child is not happy either, because by reason of his
tender age he cannot yet perform such actions: if the term is applied,
it is by way of anticipation.

For to constitute Happiness, there must be, as we have said, complete
virtue and a complete life: for many changes and chances of all kinds
arise during a life, and he who is most prosperous may become involved
in great misfortunes in his old age, as in the heroic poems the tale is
told of Priam: but the man who has experienced such fortune and died in
wretchedness, no man calls happy.

Are we then to call no man happy while he lives, and, as Solon would
have us, look to the end? And again, if we are to maintain this
position, is a man then happy when he is dead? or is not this a complete
absurdity, specially in us who say Happiness is a working of a certain
kind?

If on the other hand we do not assert that the dead man is happy, and
Solon does not mean this, but only that one would then be safe in
pronouncing a man happy, as being thenceforward out of the reach of
evils and misfortunes, this too admits of some dispute, since it is
thought that the dead has somewhat both of good and evil (if, as we must
allow, a man may have when alive but not aware of the circumstances),
as honour and dishonour, and good and bad fortune of children and
descendants generally.

Nor is this view again without its difficulties: for, after a man has
lived in blessedness to old age and died accordingly, many changes may
befall him in right of his descendants; some of them may be good and
obtain positions in life accordant to their merits, others again quite
the contrary: it is plain too that the descendants may at different
intervals or grades stand in all manner of relations to the ancestors.
Absurd indeed would be the position that even the dead man is to change
about with them and become at one time happy and at another miserable.
Absurd however it is on the other hand that the affairs of the
descendants should in no degree and during no time affect the ancestors.

But we must revert to the point first raised, since the present question
will be easily determined from that.

If then we are to look to the end and then pronounce the man blessed,
not as being so but as having been so at some previous time, surely it
is absurd that when he _is_ happy the truth is not to be asserted of
him, because we are unwilling to pronounce the living happy by reason of
their liability to changes, and because, whereas we have conceived of
happiness as something stable and no way easily changeable, the fact is
that good and bad fortune are constantly circling about the same people:
for it is quite plain, that if we are to depend upon the fortunes of
men, we shall often have to call the same man happy, and a little while
after miserable, thus representing our happy man

  "Chameleon-like, and based on rottenness."

Is not this the solution? that to make our sentence dependent on the
changes of fortune, is no way right: for not in them stands the well, or
the ill, but though human life needs these as accessories (which we have
allowed already), the workings in the way of virtue are what determine
Happiness, and the contrary the contrary.

And, by the way, the question which has been here discussed, testifies
incidentally to the truth of our account of Happiness. For to nothing
does a stability of human results attach so much as it does to the
workings in the way of virtue, since these are held to be more abiding
even than the sciences: and of these last again the most precious
are the most abiding, because the blessed live in them most and most
continuously, which seems to be the reason why they are not forgotten.
So then this stability which is sought will be in the happy man, and
he will be such through life, since always, or most of all, he will be
doing and contemplating the things which are in the way of virtue: and
the various chances of life he will bear most nobly, and at all times
and in all ways harmoniously, since he is the truly good man, or in the
terms of our proverb "a faultless cube."

And whereas the incidents of chance are many, and differ in greatness
and smallness, the small pieces of good or ill fortune evidently do not
affect the balance of life, but the great and numerous, if happening for
good, will make life more blessed (for it is their nature to contribute
to ornament, and the using of them comes to be noble and excellent), but
if for ill, they bruise as it were and maim the blessedness: for they
bring in positive pain, and hinder many acts of working. But still, even
in these, nobleness shines through when a man bears contentedly many and
great mischances not from insensibility to pain but because he is noble
and high-spirited.

And if, as we have said, the acts of working are what determine the
character of the life, no one of the blessed can ever become wretched,
because he will never do those things which are hateful and mean. For
the man who is truly good and sensible bears all fortunes, we presume,
becomingly, and always does what is noblest under the circumstances,
just as a good general employs to the best advantage the force he has
with him; or a good shoemaker makes the handsomest shoe he can out
of the leather which has been given him; and all other good artisans
likewise. And if this be so, wretched never can the happy man come to
be: I do not mean to say he will be blessed should he fall into fortunes
like those of Priam.

Nor, in truth, is he shifting and easily changeable, for on the one
hand from his happiness he will not be shaken easily nor by ordinary
mischances, but, if at all, by those which are great and numerous; and,
on the other, after such mischances he cannot regain his happiness in a
little time; but, if at all, in a long and complete period, during which
he has made himself master of great and noble things.

Why then should we not call happy the man who works in the way of
perfect virtue, and is furnished with external goods sufficient for
acting his part in the drama of life: and this during no ordinary period
but such as constitutes a complete life as we have been describing it.

Or we must add, that not only is he to live so, but his death must be in
keeping with such life, since the future is dark to us, and Happiness we
assume to be in every way an end and complete. And, if this be so, we
shall call them among the living blessed who have and will have the
things specified, but blessed _as Men_.

On these points then let it suffice to have denned thus much.


XI

Now that the fortunes of their descendants, and friends generally,
contribute nothing towards forming the condition of the dead, is plainly
a very heartless notion, and contrary to the current opinions.

But since things which befall are many, and differ in all kinds of ways,
and some touch more nearly, others less, to go into minute particular
distinctions would evidently be a long and endless task: and so it may
suffice to speak generally and in outline.

If then, as of the misfortunes which happen to one's self, some have a
certain weight and turn the balance of life, while others are, so to
speak, lighter; so it is likewise with those which befall all our
friends alike; if further, whether they whom each suffering befalls
be alive or dead makes much more difference than in a tragedy the
presupposing or actual perpetration of the various crimes and horrors,
we must take into our account this difference also, and still more
perhaps the doubt concerning the dead whether they really partake of any
good or evil; it seems to result from all these considerations, that if
anything does pierce the veil and reach them, be the same good or bad,
it must be something trivial and small, either in itself or to them; or
at least of such a magnitude or such a kind as neither to make happy
them that are not so otherwise, nor to deprive of their blessedness them
that are.

It is plain then that the good or ill fortunes of their friends do
affect the dead somewhat: but in such kind and degree as neither to make
the happy unhappy nor produce any other such effect.


XII

Having determined these points, let us examine with respect to
Happiness, whether it belongs to the class of things praiseworthy or
things precious; for to that of faculties it evidently does not.

Now it is plain that everything which is a subject of praise is praised
for being of a certain kind and bearing a certain relation to something
else: for instance, the just, and the valiant, and generally the good
man, and virtue itself, we praise because of the actions and the
results: and the strong man, and the quick runner, and so forth, we
praise for being of a certain nature and bearing a certain relation to
something good and excellent (and this is illustrated by attempts to
praise the gods; for they are presented in a ludicrous aspect by being
referred to our standard, and this results from the fact, that all
praise does, as we have said, imply reference to a standard). Now if
it is to such objects that praise belongs, it is evident that what is
applicable to the best objects is not praise, but something higher and
better: which is plain matter of fact, for not only do we call the gods
blessed and happy, but of men also we pronounce those blessed who most
nearly resemble the gods. And in like manner in respect of goods; no man
thinks of praising Happiness as he does the principle of justice, but
calls it blessed, as being somewhat more godlike and more excellent.

Eudoxus too is thought to have advanced a sound argument in support of
the claim of pleasure to the highest prize: for the fact that, though it
is one of the good things, it is not praised, he took for an indication
of its superiority to those which are subjects of praise: a superiority
he attributed also to a god and the Chief Good, on the ground that they
form the standard to which everything besides is referred. For praise
applies to virtue, because it makes men apt to do what is noble; but
encomia to definite works of body or mind.

However, it is perhaps more suitable to a regular treatise on encomia to
pursue this topic with exactness: it is enough for our purpose that from
what has been said it is evident that Happiness belongs to the class of
things precious and final. And it seems to be so also because of its
being a starting-point; which it is, in that with a view to it we all do
everything else that is done; now the starting-point and cause of good
things we assume to be something precious and divine.


XIII

Moreover, since Happiness is a kind of working of the soul in the way
of perfect Excellence, we must inquire concerning Excellence: for so
probably shall we have a clearer view concerning Happiness; and again,
he who is really a statesman is generally thought to have spent most
pains on this, for he wishes to make the citizens good and obedient
to the laws. (For examples of this class we have the lawgivers of the
Cretans and Lacedaemonians and whatever other such there have been.)
But if this investigation belongs properly to [Greek: politikae], then
clearly the inquiry will be in accordance with our original design.

Well, we are to inquire concerning Excellence, _i.e._ Human Excellence
of course, because it was the Chief Good of Man and the Happiness of Man
that we were inquiring of just now. By Human Excellence we mean not that
of man's body but that of his soul; for we call Happiness a working of
the Soul.

And if this is so, it is plain that some knowledge of the nature of the
Soul is necessary for the statesman, just as for the Oculist a knowledge
of the whole body, and the more so in proportion as [Greek: politikae]
is more precious and higher than the healing art: and in fact physicians
of the higher class do busy themselves much with the knowledge of the
body.

So then the statesman is to consider the nature of the Soul: but he must
do so with these objects in view, and so far only as may suffice for
the objects of his special inquiry: for to carry his speculations to a
greater exactness is perhaps a task more laborious than falls within his
province.

In fact, the few statements made on the subject in my popular treatises
are quite enough, and accordingly we will adopt them here: as, that
the Soul consists of two parts, the Irrational and the Rational (as to
whether these are actually divided, as are the parts of the body, and
everything that is capable of division; or are only metaphysically
speaking two, being by nature inseparable, as are convex and concave
circumferences, matters not in respect of our present purpose). And of
the Irrational, the one part seems common to other objects, and in fact
vegetative; I mean the cause of nourishment and growth (for such a
faculty of the Soul one would assume to exist in all things that receive
nourishment, even in embryos, and this the same as in the perfect
creatures; for this is more likely than that it should be a different
one).

Now the Excellence of this manifestly is not peculiar to the human
species but common to others: for this part and this faculty is thought
to work most in time of sleep, and the good and bad man are least
distinguishable while asleep; whence it is a common saying that during
one half of life there is no difference between the happy and the
wretched; and this accords with our anticipations, for sleep is an
inactivity of the soul, in so far as it is denominated good or bad,
except that in some wise some of its movements find their way through
the veil and so the good come to have better dreams than ordinary men.
But enough of this: we must forego any further mention of the nutritive
part, since it is not naturally capable of the Excellence which is
peculiarly human.

And there seems to be another Irrational Nature of the Soul, which yet
in a way partakes of Reason. For in the man who controls his appetites,
and in him who resolves to do so and fails, we praise the Reason or
Rational part of the Soul, because it exhorts aright and to the best
course: but clearly there is in them, beside the Reason, some other
natural principle which fights with and strains against the Reason. (For
in plain terms, just as paralysed limbs of the body when their owners
would move them to the right are borne aside in a contrary direction to
the left, so is it in the case of the Soul, for the impulses of men who
cannot control their appetites are to contrary points: the difference is
that in the case of the body we do see what is borne aside but in the
case of the soul we do not. But, it may be, not the less on that account
are we to suppose that there is in the Soul also somewhat besides the
Reason, which is opposed to this and goes against it; as to _how_ it is
different, that is irrelevant.)

But of Reason this too does evidently partake, as we have said: for
instance, in the man of self-control it obeys Reason: and perhaps in
the man of perfected self-mastery, or the brave man, it is yet more
obedient; in them it agrees entirely with the Reason.

So then the Irrational is plainly twofold: the one part, the merely
vegetative, has no share of Reason, but that of desire, or appetition
generally, does partake of it in a sense, in so far as it is obedient to
it and capable of submitting to its rule. (So too in common phrase we
say we have [Greek: _logos_] of our father or friends, and this in a
different sense from that in which we say we have [Greek: logos] of
mathematics.)

Now that the Irrational is in some way persuaded by the Reason,
admonition, and every act of rebuke and exhortation indicate. If then we
are to say that this also has Reason, then the Rational, as well as the
Irrational, will be twofold, the one supremely and in itself, the other
paying it a kind of filial regard.

The Excellence of Man then is divided in accordance with this
difference: we make two classes, calling the one Intellectual, and
the other Moral; pure science, intelligence, and practical
wisdom--Intellectual: liberality, and perfected self-mastery--Moral: in
speaking of a man's Moral character, we do not say he is a scientific
or intelligent but a meek man, or one of perfected self-mastery: and we
praise the man of science in right of his mental state; and of these
such as are praiseworthy we call Excellences.




BOOK II

Well: human Excellence is of two kinds, Intellectual and Moral: now the
Intellectual springs originally, and is increased subsequently, from
teaching (for the most part that is), and needs therefore experience
and time; whereas the Moral comes from custom, and so the Greek term
denoting it is but a slight deflection from the term denoting custom in
that language.

From this fact it is plain that not one of the Moral Virtues comes to be
in us merely by nature: because of such things as exist by nature, none
can be changed by custom: a stone, for instance, by nature gravitating
downwards, could never by custom be brought to ascend, not even if one
were to try and accustom it by throwing it up ten thousand times; nor
could file again be brought to descend, nor in fact could anything whose
nature is in one way be brought by custom to be in another. The Virtues
then come to be in us neither by nature, nor in despite of nature, but
we are furnished by nature with a capacity for receiving themu and are
perfected in them through custom.

Again, in whatever cases we get things by nature, we get the faculties
first and perform the acts of working afterwards; an illustration of
which is afforded by the case of our bodily senses, for it was not
from having often seen or heard that we got these senses, but just
the reverse: we had them and so exercised them, but did not have
them because we had exercised them. But the Virtues we get by first
performing single acts of working, which, again, is the case of other
things, as the arts for instance; for what we have to make when we
have learned how, these we learn how to make by making: men come to be
builders, for instance, by building; harp-players, by playing on the
harp: exactly so, by doing just actions we come to be just; by doing the
actions of self-mastery we come to be perfected in self-mastery; and by
doing brave actions brave.

And to the truth of this testimony is borne by what takes place in
communities: because the law-givers make the individual members good men
by habituation, and this is the intention certainly of every law-giver,
and all who do not effect it well fail of their intent; and herein
consists the difference between a good Constitution and a bad.

Again, every Virtue is either produced or destroyed from and by the very
same circumstances: art too in like manner; I mean it is by playing
the harp that both the good and the bad harp-players are formed: and
similarly builders and all the rest; by building well men will become
good builders; by doing it badly bad ones: in fact, if this had not been
so, there would have been no need of instructors, but all men would have
been at once good or bad in their several arts without them.

So too then is it with the Virtues: for by acting in the various
relations in which we are thrown with our fellow men, we come to be,
some just, some unjust: and by acting in dangerous positions and being
habituated to feel fear or confidence, we come to be, some brave, others
cowards.

Similarly is it also with respect to the occasions of lust and anger:
for some men come to be perfected in self-mastery and mild, others
destitute of all self-control and passionate; the one class by behaving
in one way under them, the other by behaving in another. Or, in one
word, the habits are produced from the acts of working like to them: and
so what we have to do is to give a certain character to these particular
acts, because the habits formed correspond to the differences of these.

So then, whether we are accustomed this way or that straight from
childhood, makes not a small but an important difference, or rather I
would say it makes all the difference.


II

Since then the object of the present treatise is not mere speculation,
as it is of some others (for we are inquiring not merely that we may
know what virtue is but that we may become virtuous, else it would have
been useless), we must consider as to the particular actions how we are
to do them, because, as we have just said, the quality of the habits
that shall be formed depends on these.

Now, that we are to act in accordance with Right Reason is a general
maxim, and may for the present be taken for granted: we will speak of it
hereafter, and say both what Right Reason is, and what are its relations
to the other virtues.

[Sidenote: 1104a]

But let this point be first thoroughly understood between us, that all
which can be said on moral action must be said in outline, as it were,
and not exactly: for as we remarked at the commencement, such reasoning
only must be required as the nature of the subject-matter admits of, and
matters of moral action and expediency have no fixedness any more than
matters of health. And if the subject in its general maxims is such,
still less in its application to particular cases is exactness
attainable: because these fall not under any art or system of rules, but
it must be left in each instance to the individual agents to look to the
exigencies of the particular case, as it is in the art of healing,
or that of navigating a ship. Still, though the present subject is
confessedly such, we must try and do what we can for it.

First then this must be noted, that it is the nature of such things to
be spoiled by defect and excess; as we see in the case of health and
strength (since for the illustration of things which cannot be seen we
must use those that can), for excessive training impairs the strength as
well as deficient: meat and drink, in like manner, in too great or too
small quantities, impair the health: while in due proportion they cause,
increase, and preserve it.

Thus it is therefore with the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage and the rest of the Virtues: for the man who flies from and
fears all things, and never stands up against anything, comes to be a
coward; and he who fears nothing, but goes at everything, comes to be
rash. In like manner too, he that tastes of every pleasure and abstains
from none comes to lose all self-control; while he who avoids all, as
do the dull and clownish, comes as it were to lose his faculties of
perception: that is to say, the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage are spoiled by the excess and defect, but by the mean state are
preserved.

Furthermore, not only do the origination, growth, and marring of the
habits come from and by the same circumstances, but also the acts of
working after the habits are formed will be exercised on the same: for
so it is also with those other things which are more directly matters of
sight, strength for instance: for this comes by taking plenty of food
and doing plenty of work, and the man who has attained strength is best
able to do these: and so it is with the Virtues, for not only do we by
abstaining from pleasures come to be perfected in Self-Mastery, but when
we have come to be so we can best abstain from them: similarly too with
Courage: for it is by accustoming ourselves to despise objects of fear
and stand up against them that we come to be brave; and [Sidenote(?):
1104_b_] after we have come to be so we shall be best able to stand up
against such objects.

And for a test of the formation of the habits we must [Sidenote(?): III]
take the pleasure or pain which succeeds the acts; for he is perfected
in Self-Mastery who not only abstains from the bodily pleasures but is
glad to do so; whereas he who abstains but is sorry to do it has not
Self-Mastery: he again is brave who stands up against danger, either
with positive pleasure or at least without any pain; whereas he who does
it with pain is not brave.

For Moral Virtue has for its object-matter pleasures and pains, because
by reason of pleasure we do what is bad, and by reason of pain decline
doing what is right (for which cause, as Plato observes, men should have
been trained straight from their childhood to receive pleasure and pain
from proper objects, for this is the right education). Again: since
Virtues have to do with actions and feelings, and on every feeling and
every action pleasure and pain follow, here again is another proof that
Virtue has for its object-matter pleasure and pain. The same is
shown also by the fact that punishments are effected through the
instrumentality of these; because they are of the nature of remedies,
and it is the nature of remedies to be the contraries of the ills they
cure. Again, to quote what we said before: every habit of the Soul by
its very nature has relation to, and exerts itself upon, things of the
same kind as those by which it is naturally deteriorated or improved:
now such habits do come to be vicious by reason of pleasures and pains,
that is, by men pursuing or avoiding respectively, either such as they
ought not, or at wrong times, or in wrong manner, and so forth (for
which reason, by the way, some people define the Virtues as certain
states of impassibility and utter quietude, but they are wrong because
they speak without modification, instead of adding "as they ought," "as
they ought not," and "when," and so on). Virtue then is assumed to be
that habit which is such, in relation to pleasures and pains, as to
effect the best results, and Vice the contrary.

The following considerations may also serve to set this in a clear
light. There are principally three things moving us to choice and three
to avoidance, the honourable, the expedient, the pleasant; and their
three contraries, the dishonourable, the hurtful, and the painful: now
the good man is apt to go right, and the bad man wrong, with respect
to all these of course, but most specially with respect to pleasure:
because not only is this common to him with all animals but also it is
a concomitant of all those things which move to choice, since both the
honourable and the expedient give an impression of pleasure.

[Sidenote: 1105a] Again, it grows up with us all from infancy, and so it
is a hard matter to remove from ourselves this feeling, engrained as it
is into our very life.

Again, we adopt pleasure and pain (some of us more, and some less) as
the measure even of actions: for this cause then our whole business must
be with them, since to receive right or wrong impressions of pleasure
and pain is a thing of no little importance in respect of the actions.
Once more; it is harder, as Heraclitus says, to fight against pleasure
than against anger: now it is about that which is more than commonly
difficult that art comes into being, and virtue too, because in that
which is difficult the good is of a higher order: and so for this
reason too both virtue and moral philosophy generally must wholly busy
themselves respecting pleasures and pains, because he that uses these
well will be good, he that does so ill will be bad.

Let us then be understood to have stated, that Virtue has for its
object-matter pleasures and pains, and that it is either increased or
marred by the same circumstances (differently used) by which it
is originally generated, and that it exerts itself on the same
circumstances out of which it was generated.

Now I can conceive a person perplexed as to the meaning of our
statement, that men must do just actions to become just, and those of
self-mastery to acquire the habit of self-mastery; "for," he would say,
"if men are doing the actions they have the respective virtues already,
just as men are grammarians or musicians when they do the actions of
either art." May we not reply by saying that it is not so even in the
case of the arts referred to: because a man may produce something
grammatical either by chance or the suggestion of another; but then only
will he be a grammarian when he not only produces something grammatical
but does so grammarian-wise, _i.e._ in virtue of the grammatical
knowledge he himself possesses.

Again, the cases of the arts and the virtues are not parallel: because
those things which are produced by the arts have their excellence in
themselves, and it is sufficient therefore [Sidenote: 1105b] that these
when produced should be in a certain state: but those which are produced
in the way of the virtues, are, strictly speaking, actions of a certain
kind (say of Justice or perfected Self-Mastery), not merely if in
themselves they are in a certain state but if also he who does them
does them being himself in a certain state, first if knowing what he is
doing, next if with deliberate preference, and with such preference for
the things' own sake; and thirdly if being himself stable and unapt to
change. Now to constitute possession of the arts these requisites are
not reckoned in, excepting the one point of knowledge: whereas for
possession of the virtues knowledge avails little or nothing, but the
other requisites avail not a little, but, in fact, are all in all, and
these requisites as a matter of fact do come from oftentimes doing the
actions of Justice and perfected Self-Mastery.

The facts, it is true, are called by the names of these habits when they
are such as the just or perfectly self-mastering man would do; but he is
not in possession of the virtues who merely does these facts, but he who
also so does them as the just and self-mastering do them.

We are right then in saying, that these virtues are formed in a man by
his doing the actions; but no one, if he should leave them undone, would
be even in the way to become a good man. Yet people in general do not
perform these actions, but taking refuge in talk they flatter themselves
they are philosophising, and that they will so be good men: acting in
truth very like those sick people who listen to the doctor with great
attention but do nothing that he tells them: just as these then cannot
be well bodily under such a course of treatment, so neither can those be
mentally by such philosophising.

[Sidenote: V] Next, we must examine what Virtue is. Well, since the
things which come to be in the mind are, in all, of three kinds,
Feelings, Capacities, States, Virtue of course must belong to one of the
three classes.

By Feelings, I mean such as lust, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy,
friendship, hatred, longing, emulation, compassion, in short all such as
are followed by pleasure or pain: by Capacities, those in right of which
we are said to be capable of these feelings; as by virtue of which we
are able to have been made angry, or grieved, or to have compassionated;
by States, those in right of which we are in a certain relation good
or bad to the aforementioned feelings; to having been made angry, for
instance, we are in a wrong relation if in our anger we were too violent
or too slack, but if we were in the happy medium we are in a right
relation to the feeling. And so on of the rest.

Now Feelings neither the virtues nor vices are, because in right of the
Feelings we are not denominated either good or bad, but in right of the
virtues and vices we are.

[Sidenote: 1106_a_] Again, in right of the Feelings we are neither
praised nor blamed (for a man is not commended for being afraid or
being angry, nor blamed for being angry merely but for being so in a
particular way), but in right of the virtues and vices we are.

Again, both anger and fear we feel without moral choice, whereas the
virtues are acts of moral choice, or at least certainly not independent
of it.

Moreover, in right of the Feelings we are said to be moved, but in right
of the virtues and vices not to be moved, but disposed, in a certain
way.

And for these same reasons they are not Capacities, for we are not
called good or bad merely because we are able to feel, nor are we
praised or blamed.

And again, Capacities we have by nature, but we do not come to be good
or bad by nature, as we have said before.

Since then the virtues are neither Feelings nor Capacities, it remains
that they must be States.

[Sidenote: VI] Now what the genus of Virtue is has been said; but we
must not merely speak of it thus, that it is a state but say also what
kind of a state it is. We must observe then that all excellence makes
that whereof it is the excellence both to be itself in a good state and
to perform its work well. The excellence of the eye, for instance, makes
both the eye good and its work also: for by the excellence of the eye
we see well. So too the excellence of the horse makes a horse good, and
good in speed, and in carrying his rider, and standing up against the
enemy. If then this is universally the case, the excellence of Man, i.e.
Virtue, must be a state whereby Man comes to be good and whereby he will
perform well his proper work. Now how this shall be it is true we have
said already, but still perhaps it may throw light on the subject to see
what is its characteristic nature.

In all quantity then, whether continuous or discrete, one may take the
greater part, the less, or the exactly equal, and these either with
reference to the thing itself, or relatively to us: and the exactly
equal is a mean between excess and defect. Now by the mean of the thing,
_i.e._ absolute mean, I denote that which is equidistant from either
extreme (which of course is one and the same to all), and by the mean
relatively to ourselves, that which is neither too much nor too little
for the particular individual. This of course is not one nor the same to
all: for instance, suppose ten is too much and two too little, people
take six for the absolute mean; because it exceeds the smaller sum by
exactly as much as it is itself exceeded by the larger, and this mean is
according to arithmetical proportion.

[Sidenote: 1106_b_] But the mean relatively to ourselves must not be
so found ; for it does not follow, supposing ten minæ is too large a
quantity to eat and two too small, that the trainer will order his man
six; because for the person who is to take it this also may be too much
or too little: for Milo it would be too little, but for a man just
commencing his athletic exercises too much: similarly too of the
exercises themselves, as running or wrestling.

So then it seems every one possessed of skill avoids excess and defect,
but seeks for and chooses the mean, not the absolute but the relative.

Now if all skill thus accomplishes well its work by keeping an eye on
the mean, and bringing the works to this point (whence it is common
enough to say of such works as are in a good state, "one cannot add
to or take ought from them," under the notion of excess or defect
destroying goodness but the mean state preserving it), and good
artisans, as we say, work with their eye on this, and excellence, like
nature, is more exact and better than any art in the world, it must have
an aptitude to aim at the mean.

It is moral excellence, _i.e._ Virtue, of course which I mean, because
this it is which is concerned with feelings and actions, and in these
there can be excess and defect and the mean: it is possible, for
instance, to feel the emotions of fear, confidence, lust, anger,
compassion, and pleasure and pain generally, too much or too little,
and in either case wrongly; but to feel them when we ought, on what
occasions, towards whom, why, and as, we should do, is the mean, or in
other words the best state, and this is the property of Virtue.

In like manner too with respect to the actions, there may be excess and
defect and the mean. Now Virtue is concerned with feelings and actions,
in which the excess is wrong and the defect is blamed but the mean is
praised and goes right; and both these circumstances belong to Virtue.
Virtue then is in a sense a mean state, since it certainly has an
aptitude for aiming at the mean.

Again, one may go wrong in many different ways (because, as the
Pythagoreans expressed it, evil is of the class of the infinite, good
of the finite), but right only in one; and so the former is easy, the
latter difficult; easy to miss the mark, but hard to hit it: and for
these reasons, therefore, both the excess and defect belong to Vice, and
the mean state to Virtue; for, as the poet has it,

  "Men may be bad in many ways,
  But good in one alone."
Virtue then is "a state apt to exercise deliberate choice, being in the
relative mean, determined by reason, and as the man of practical wisdom
would determine."

It is a middle state between too faulty ones, in the way of excess on
one side and of defect on the other: and it is so moreover, because the
faulty states on one side fall short of, and those on the other exceed,
what is right, both in the case of the feelings and the actions; but
Virtue finds, and when found adopts, the mean.

And so, viewing it in respect of its essence and definition, Virtue is a
mean state; but in reference to the chief good and to excellence it is
the highest state possible.

But it must not be supposed that every action or every feeling is
capable of subsisting in this mean state, because some there are
which are so named as immediately to convey the notion of badness, as
malevolence, shamelessness, envy; or, to instance in actions, adultery,
theft, homicide; for all these and suchlike are blamed because they are
in themselves bad, not the having too much or too little of them.

In these then you never can go right, but must always be wrong: nor in
such does the right or wrong depend on the selection of a proper person,
time, or manner (take adultery for instance), but simply doing any one
soever of those things is being wrong.

You might as well require that there should be determined a mean state,
an excess and a defect in respect of acting unjustly, being cowardly, or
giving up all control of the passions: for at this rate there will be
of excess and defect a mean state; of excess, excess; and of defect,
defect.

But just as of perfected self-mastery and courage there is no excess and
defect, because the mean is in one point of view the highest possible
state, so neither of those faulty states can you have a mean state,
excess, or defect, but howsoever done they are wrong: you cannot, in
short, have of excess and defect a mean state, nor of a mean state
excess and defect.


VII

It is not enough, however, to state this in general terms, we must also
apply it to particular instances, because in treatises on moral conduct
general statements have an air of vagueness, but those which go into
detail one of greater reality: for the actions after all must be in
detail, and the general statements, to be worth anything, must hold good
here.

We must take these details then from the Table.

I. In respect of fears and confidence or boldness:

[Sidenote: 1107b]

The Mean state is Courage: men may exceed, of course, either in absence
of fear or in positive confidence: the former has no name (which is a
common case), the latter is called rash: again, the man who has too much
fear and too little confidence is called a coward.

II. In respect of pleasures and pains (but not all, and perhaps fewer
pains than pleasures):

The Mean state here is perfected Self-Mastery, the defect total absence
of Self-control. As for defect in respect of pleasure, there are really
no people who are chargeable with it, so, of course, there is really no
name for such characters, but, as they are conceivable, we will give
them one and call them insensible.

III. In respect of giving and taking wealth (a):

The mean state is Liberality, the excess Prodigality, the defect
Stinginess: here each of the extremes involves really an excess and
defect contrary to each other: I mean, the prodigal gives out too much
and takes in too little, while the stingy man takes in too much and
gives out too little. (It must be understood that we are now giving
merely an outline and summary, intentionally: and we will, in a later
part of the treatise, draw out the distinctions with greater exactness.)

IV. In respect of wealth (b):

There are other dispositions besides these just mentioned; a mean state
called Munificence (for the munificent man differs from the liberal, the
former having necessarily to do with great wealth, the latter with but
small); the excess called by the names either of Want of taste or
Vulgar Profusion, and the defect Paltriness (these also differ from the
extremes connected with liberality, and the manner of their difference
shall also be spoken of later).

V. In respect of honour and dishonour (a):

The mean state Greatness of Soul, the excess which may be called
braggadocio, and the defect Littleness of Soul.

VI. In respect of honour and dishonour (b):

[Sidenote: 1108a]

Now there is a state bearing the same relation to Greatness of Soul as
we said just now Liberality does to Munificence, with the difference
that is of being about a small amount of the same thing: this state
having reference to small honour, as Greatness of Soul to great honour;
a man may, of course, grasp at honour either more than he should or
less; now he that exceeds in his grasping at it is called ambitious, he
that falls short unambitious, he that is just as he should be has no
proper name: nor in fact have the states, except that the disposition of
the ambitious man is called ambition. For this reason those who are in
either extreme lay claim to the mean as a debateable land, and we call
the virtuous character sometimes by the name ambitious, sometimes by
that of unambitious, and we commend sometimes the one and sometimes
the other. Why we do it shall be said in the subsequent part of the
treatise; but now we will go on with the rest of the virtues after the
plan we have laid down.

VII. In respect of anger:

Here too there is excess, defect, and a mean state; but since they
may be said to have really no proper names, as we call the virtuous
character Meek, we will call the mean state Meekness, and of the
extremes, let the man who is excessive be denominated Passionate, and
the faulty state Passionateness, and him who is deficient Angerless, and
the defect Angerlessness.

There are also three other mean states, having some mutual resemblance,
but still with differences; they are alike in that they all have for
their object-matter intercourse of words and deeds, and they differ in
that one has respect to truth herein, the other two to what is pleasant;
and this in two ways, the one in relaxation and amusement, the other in
all things which occur in daily life. We must say a word or two about
these also, that we may the better see that in all matters the mean is
praiseworthy, while the extremes are neither right nor worthy of praise
but of blame.

Now of these, it is true, the majority have really no proper names, but
still we must try, as in the other cases, to coin some for them for the
sake of clearness and intelligibleness.

I. In respect of truth: The man who is in the mean state we will call
Truthful, and his state Truthfulness, and as to the disguise of truth,
if it be on the side of exaggeration, Braggadocia, and him that has it a
Braggadocio; if on that of diminution, Reserve and Reserved shall be the
terms.

II. In respect of what is pleasant in the way of relaxation or
amusement: The mean state shall be called Easy-pleasantry, and the
character accordingly a man of Easy-pleasantry; the excess Buffoonery,
and the man a Buffoon; the man deficient herein a Clown, and his state
Clownishness.

III. In respect of what is pleasant in daily life: He that is as he
should be may be called Friendly, and his mean state Friendliness: he
that exceeds, if it be without any interested motive, somewhat too
Complaisant, if with such motive, a Flatterer: he that is deficient and
in all instances unpleasant, Quarrelsome and Cross.

There are mean states likewise in feelings and matters concerning them.
Shamefacedness, for instance, is no virtue, still a man is praised for
being shamefaced: for in these too the one is denominated the man in the
mean state, the other in the excess; the Dumbfoundered, for instance,
who is overwhelmed with shame on all and any occasions: the man who is
in the defect, _i.e._ who has no shame at all in his composition, is
called Shameless: but the right character Shamefaced.

Indignation against successful vice, again, is a state in the mean
between Envy and Malevolence: they all three have respect to pleasure
and pain produced by what happens to one's neighbour: for the man who
has this right feeling is annoyed at undeserved success of others, while
the envious man goes beyond him and is annoyed at all success of others,
and the malevolent falls so far short of feeling annoyance that he even
rejoices [at misfortune of others].

But for the discussion of these also there will be another opportunity,
as of Justice too, because the term is used in more senses than one. So
after this we will go accurately into each and say how they are mean
states: and in like manner also with respect to the Intellectual
Excellences.

Now as there are three states in each case, two faulty either in the way
of excess or defect, and one right, which is the mean state, of course
all are in a way opposed to one another; the extremes, for instance, not
only to the mean but also to one another, and the mean to the extremes:
for just as the half is greater if compared with the less portion, and
less if compared with the greater, so the mean states, compared with the
defects, exceed, whether in feelings or actions, and _vice versa_. The
brave man, for instance, shows as rash when compared with the coward,
and cowardly when compared with the rash; similarly too the man of
perfected self-mastery, viewed in comparison with the man destitute of
all perception, shows like a man of no self-control, but in comparison
with the man who really has no self-control, he looks like one destitute
of all perception: and the liberal man compared with the stingy seems
prodigal, and by the side of the prodigal, stingy.

And so the extreme characters push away, so to speak, towards each other
the man in the mean state; the brave man is called a rash man by
the coward, and a coward by the rash man, and in the other cases
accordingly. And there being this mutual opposition, the contrariety
between the extremes is greater than between either and the mean,
because they are further from one another than from the mean, just as
the greater or less portion differ more from each other than either from
the exact half.

Again, in some cases an extreme will bear a resemblance to the mean;
rashness, for instance, to courage, and prodigality to liberality; but
between the extremes there is the greatest dissimilarity. Now things
which are furthest from one another are defined to be contrary, and so
the further off the more contrary will they be.

[Sidenote: 1109a] Further: of the extremes in some cases the excess,
and in others the defect, is most opposed to the mean: to courage, for
instance, not rashness which is the excess, but cowardice which is the
defect; whereas to perfected self-mastery not insensibility which is the
defect but absence of all self-control which is the excess.

And for this there are two reasons to be given; one from the nature of
the thing itself, because from the one extreme being nearer and more
like the mean, we do not put this against it, but the other; as, for
instance, since rashness is thought to be nearer to courage than
cowardice is, and to resemble it more, we put cowardice against courage
rather than rashness, because those things which are further from the
mean are thought to be more contrary to it. This then is one reason
arising from the thing itself; there is another arising from our own
constitution and make: for in each man's own case those things give the
impression of being more contrary to the mean to which we individually
have a natural bias. Thus we have a natural bias towards pleasures,
for which reason we are much more inclined to the rejection of all
self-control, than to self-discipline.

These things then to which the bias is, we call more contrary, and so
total want of self-control (the excess) is more contrary than the defect
is to perfected self-mastery.


IX

Now that Moral Virtue is a mean state, and how it is so, and that it
lies between two faulty states, one in the way of excess and another in
the way of defect, and that it is so because it has an aptitude to aim
at the mean both in feelings and actions, all this has been set forth
fully and sufficiently.

And so it is hard to be good: for surely hard it is in each instance to
find the mean, just as to find the mean point or centre of a circle is
not what any man can do, but only he who knows how: just so to be angry,
to give money, and be expensive, is what any man can do, and easy: but
to do these to the right person, in due proportion, at the right time,
with a right object, and in the right manner, this is not as before what
any man can do, nor is it easy; and for this cause goodness is rare, and
praiseworthy, and noble.

Therefore he who aims at the mean should make it his first care to keep
away from that extreme which is more contrary than the other to the
mean; just as Calypso in Homer advises Ulysses,

  "Clear of this smoke and surge thy barque direct;"

because of the two extremes the one is always more, and the other
less, erroneous; and, therefore, since to hit exactly on the mean is
difficult, one must take the least of the evils as the safest plan; and
this a man will be doing, if he follows this method.

[Sidenote: 1109b] We ought also to take into consideration our own
natural bias; which varies in each man's case, and will be ascertained
from the pleasure and pain arising in us. Furthermore, we should force
ourselves off in the contrary direction, because we shall find ourselves
in the mean after we have removed ourselves far from the wrong side,
exactly as men do in straightening bent timber.

But in all cases we must guard most carefully against what is pleasant,
and pleasure itself, because we are not impartial judges of it.

We ought to feel in fact towards pleasure as did the old counsellors
towards Helen, and in all cases pronounce a similar sentence; for so by
sending it away from us, we shall err the less.

Well, to speak very briefly, these are the precautions by adopting which
we shall be best able to attain the mean.

Still, perhaps, after all it is a matter of difficulty, and specially
in the particular instances: it is not easy, for instance, to determine
exactly in what manner, with what persons, for what causes, and for what
length of time, one ought to feel anger: for we ourselves sometimes
praise those who are defective in this feeling, and we call them meek;
at another, we term the hot-tempered manly and spirited.

Then, again, he who makes a small deflection from what is right, be it
on the side of too much or too little, is not blamed, only he who makes
a considerable one; for he cannot escape observation. But to what point
or degree a man must err in order to incur blame, it is not easy to
determine exactly in words: nor in fact any of those points which are
matter of perception by the Moral Sense: such questions are matters of
detail, and the decision of them rests with the Moral Sense.

At all events thus much is plain, that the mean state is in all things
praiseworthy, and that practically we must deflect sometimes towards
excess sometimes towards defect, because this will be the easiest method
of hitting on the mean, that is, on what is right.




BOOK III

I Now since Virtue is concerned with the regulation of feelings and
actions, and praise and blame arise upon such as are voluntary, while
for the involuntary allowance is made, and sometimes compassion is
excited, it is perhaps a necessary task for those who are investigating
the nature of Virtue to draw out the distinction between what is
voluntary and what involuntary; and it is certainly useful for
legislators, with respect to the assigning of honours and punishments.



III

Involuntary actions then are thought to be of two kinds, being
done either on compulsion, or by reason of ignorance. An action is,
properly speaking, compulsory, when the origination is external to the
agent, being such that in it the agent (perhaps we may more properly
say the patient) contributes nothing; as if a wind were to convey you
anywhere, or men having power over your person.

But when actions are done, either from fear of greater evils, or from
some honourable motive, as, for instance, if you were ordered to commit
some base act by a despot who had your parents or children in his power,
and they were to be saved upon your compliance or die upon your refusal,
in such cases there is room for a question whether the actions are
voluntary or involuntary.

A similar question arises with respect to cases of throwing goods
overboard in a storm: abstractedly no man throws away his property
willingly, but with a view to his own and his shipmates' safety any one
would who had any sense.

The truth is, such actions are of a mixed kind, but are most like
voluntary actions; for they are choiceworthy at the time when they are
being done, and the end or object of the action must be taken with
reference to the actual occasion. Further, we must denominate an action
voluntary or involuntary at the time of doing it: now in the given case
the man acts voluntarily, because the originating of the motion of his
limbs in such actions rests with himself; and where the origination is
in himself it rests with himself to do or not to do.

Such actions then are voluntary, though in the abstract perhaps
involuntary because no one would choose any of such things in and by
itself.

But for such actions men sometimes are even praised, as when they endure
any disgrace or pain to secure great and honourable equivalents; if
_vice versâ_, then they are blamed, because it shows a base mind to
endure things very disgraceful for no honourable object, or for a
trifling one.

For some again no praise is given, but allowance is made; as where a
man does what he should not by reason of such things as overstrain the
powers of human nature, or pass the limits of human endurance.

Some acts perhaps there are for which compulsion cannot be pleaded, but
a man should rather suffer the worst and die; how absurd, for instance,
are the pleas of compulsion with which Alcmaeon in Euripides' play
excuses his matricide!

But it is difficult sometimes to decide what kind of thing should be
chosen instead of what, or what endured in preference to what, and much
moreso to abide by one's decisions: for in general the alternatives are
painful, and the actions required are base, and so praise or blame is
awarded according as persons have been compelled or no.

1110b What kind of actions then are to be called compulsory? may we say,
simply and abstractedly whenever the cause is external and the agent
contributes nothing; and that where the acts are in themselves such
as one would not wish but choiceworthy at the present time and in
preference to such and such things, and where the origination rests with
the agent, the actions are in themselves involuntary but at the given
time and in preference to such and such things voluntary; and they are
more like voluntary than involuntary, because the actions consist of
little details, and these are voluntary.

But what kind of things one ought to choose instead of what, it is not
easy to settle, for there are many differences in particular instances.

But suppose a person should say, things pleasant and honourable exert
a compulsive force (for that they are external and do compel); at that
rate every action is on compulsion, because these are universal motives
of action.

Again, they who act on compulsion and against their will do so with
pain; but they who act by reason of what is pleasant or honourable act
with pleasure.

It is truly absurd for a man to attribute his actions to external things
instead of to his own capacity for being easily caught by them; or,
again, to ascribe the honourable to himself, and the base ones to
pleasure.

So then that seems to be compulsory "whose origination is from without,
the party compelled contributing nothing." Now every action of which
ignorance is the cause is not-voluntary, but that only is involuntary
which is attended with pain and remorse; for clearly the man who has
done anything by reason of ignorance, but is not annoyed at his own
action, cannot be said to have done it _with_ his will because he did
not know he was doing it, nor again _against_ his will because he is not
sorry for it.

So then of the class "acting by reason of ignorance," he who feels
regret afterwards is thought to be an involuntary agent, and him that
has no such feeling, since he certainly is different from the other, we
will call a not-voluntary agent; for as there is a real difference it is
better to have a proper name.

Again, there seems to be a difference between acting _because of_
ignorance and acting _with_ ignorance: for instance, we do not usually
assign ignorance as the cause of the actions of the drunken or angry
man, but either the drunkenness or the anger, yet they act not knowingly
but with ignorance.

Again, every bad man is ignorant what he ought to do and what to leave
undone, and by reason of such error men become unjust and wholly evil.

[Sidenote: 1111a] Again, we do not usually apply the term involuntary
when a man is ignorant of his own true interest; because ignorance which
affects moral choice constitutes depravity but not involuntariness: nor
does any ignorance of principle (because for this men are blamed)
but ignorance in particular details, wherein consists the action and
wherewith it is concerned, for in these there is both compassion and
allowance, because he who acts in ignorance of any of them acts in a
proper sense involuntarily.

It may be as well, therefore, to define these particular details; what
they are, and how many; viz. who acts, what he is doing, with respect to
what or in what, sometimes with what, as with what instrument, and with
what result (as that of preservation, for instance), and how, as whether
softly or violently.

All these particulars, in one and the same case, no man in his senses
could be ignorant of; plainly not of the agent, being himself. But
what he is doing a man may be ignorant, as men in speaking say a
thing escaped them unawares; or as Aeschylus did with respect to the
Mysteries, that he was not aware that it was unlawful to speak of them;
or as in the case of that catapult accident the other day the man said
he discharged it merely to display its operation. Or a person might
suppose a son to be an enemy, as Merope did; or that the spear really
pointed was rounded off; or that the stone was a pumice; or in striking
with a view to save might kill; or might strike when merely wishing to
show another, as people do in sham-fighting.

Now since ignorance is possible in respect to all these details in
which the action consists, he that acted in ignorance of any of them is
thought to have acted involuntarily, and he most so who was in ignorance
as regards the most important, which are thought to be those in which
the action consists, and the result.

Further, not only must the ignorance be of this kind, to constitute an
action involuntary, but it must be also understood that the action is
followed by pain and regret.

Now since all involuntary action is either upon compulsion or by reason
of ignorance, Voluntary Action would seem to be "that whose origination
is in the agent, he being aware of the particular details in which the
action consists."

For, it may be, men are not justified by calling those actions
involuntary, which are done by reason of Anger or Lust.

Because, in the first place, if this be so no other animal but man, and
not even children, can be said to act voluntarily. Next, is it meant
that we never act voluntarily when we act from Lust or Anger, or that we
act voluntarily in doing what is right and involuntarily in doing what
is discreditable? The latter supposition is absurd, since the cause
is one and the same. Then as to the former, it is a strange thing to
maintain actions to be involuntary which we are bound to grasp at: now
there are occasions on which anger is a duty, and there are things which
we are bound to lust after, health, for instance, and learning.

Again, whereas actions strictly involuntary are thought to be attended
with pain, those which are done to gratify lust are thought to be
pleasant.

Again: how does the involuntariness make any difference between wrong
actions done from deliberate calculation, and those done by reason of
anger? for both ought to be avoided, and the irrational feelings are
thought to be just as natural to man as reason, and so of course must be
such actions of the individual as are done from Anger and Lust. It is
absurd then to class these actions among the involuntary.

II

Having thus drawn out the distinction between voluntary and involuntary
action our next step is to examine into the nature of Moral Choice,
because this seems most intimately connected with Virtue and to be a
more decisive test of moral character than a man's acts are.

Now Moral Choice is plainly voluntary, but the two are not co-extensive,
voluntary being the more comprehensive term; for first, children and all
other animals share in voluntary action but not in Moral Choice; and
next, sudden actions we call voluntary but do not ascribe them to Moral
Choice.

Nor do they appear to be right who say it is lust or anger, or wish, or
opinion of a certain kind; because, in the first place, Moral Choice is
not shared by the irrational animals while Lust and Anger are. Next; the
man who fails of self-control acts from Lust but not from Moral Choice;
the man of self-control, on the contrary, from Moral Choice, not from
Lust. Again: whereas Lust is frequently opposed to Moral Choice, Lust is
not to Lust.

Lastly: the object-matter of Lust is the pleasant and the painful, but
of Moral Choice neither the one nor the other. Still less can it be
Anger, because actions done from Anger are thought generally to be least
of all consequent on Moral Choice.

Nor is it Wish either, though appearing closely connected with it;
because, in the first place, Moral Choice has not for its objects
impossibilities, and if a man were to say he chose them he would be
thought to be a fool; but Wish may have impossible things for its
objects, immortality for instance.

Wish again may be exercised on things in the accomplishment of which
one's self could have nothing to do, as the success of any particular
actor or athlete; but no man chooses things of this nature, only such as
he believes he may himself be instrumental in procuring.

Further: Wish has for its object the End rather, but Moral Choice the
means to the End; for instance, we wish to be healthy but we choose
the means which will make us so; or happiness again we wish for, and
commonly say so, but to say we choose is not an appropriate term,
because, in short, the province of Moral Choice seems to be those things
which are in our own power.

Neither can it be Opinion; for Opinion is thought to be unlimited in its
range of objects, and to be exercised as well upon things eternal and
impossible as on those which are in our own power: again, Opinion is
logically divided into true and false, not into good and bad as Moral
Choice is.

However, nobody perhaps maintains its identity with Opinion simply; but
it is not the same with opinion of any kind, because by choosing good
and bad things we are constituted of a certain character, but by having
opinions on them we are not.

Again, we choose to take or avoid, and so on, but we opine what a thing
is, or for what it is serviceable, or how; but we do not opine to take
or avoid.

Further, Moral Choice is commended rather for having a right object than
for being judicious, but Opinion for being formed in accordance with
truth.

Again, we choose such things as we pretty well know to be good, but we
form opinions respecting such as we do not know at all.

And it is not thought that choosing and opining best always go together,
but that some opine the better course and yet by reason of viciousness
choose not the things which they should.

It may be urged, that Opinion always precedes or accompanies Moral
Choice; be it so, this makes no difference, for this is not the point in
question, but whether Moral Choice is the same as Opinion of a certain
kind.

Since then it is none of the aforementioned things, what is it, or how
is it characterised? Voluntary it plainly is, but not all voluntary
action is an object of Moral Choice. May we not say then, it is "that
voluntary which has passed through a stage of previous deliberation?"
because Moral Choice is attended with reasoning and intellectual
process. The etymology of its Greek name seems to give a hint of it,
being when analysed "chosen in preference to somewhat else."


III

Well then; do men deliberate about everything, and is anything soever
the object of Deliberation, or are there some matters with respect to
which there is none? (It may be as well perhaps to say, that by "object
of Deliberation" is meant such matter as a sensible man would deliberate
upon, not what any fool or madman might.)

Well: about eternal things no one deliberates; as, for instance, the
universe, or the incommensurability of the diameter and side of a
square.

Nor again about things which are in motion but which always happen in
the same way either necessarily, or naturally, or from some other cause,
as the solstices or the sunrise.

Nor about those which are variable, as drought and rains; nor fortuitous
matters, as finding of treasure.

Nor in fact even about all human affairs; no Lacedæmonian, for instance,
deliberates as to the best course for the Scythian government to adopt;
because in such cases we have no power over the result.

But we do deliberate respecting such practical matters as are in our own
power (which are what are left after all our exclusions).

I have adopted this division because causes seem to be divisible into
nature, necessity, chance, and moreover intellect, and all human powers.

And as man in general deliberates about what man in general can effect,
so individuals do about such practical things as can be effected through
their own instrumentality.

[Sidenote: 1112b] Again, we do not deliberate respecting such arts or
sciences as are exact and independent: as, for instance, about written
characters, because we have no doubt how they should be formed; but we
do deliberate on all buch things as are usually done through our own
instrumentality, but not invariably in the same way; as, for instance,
about matters connected with the healing art, or with money-making; and,
again, more about piloting ships than gymnastic exercises, because the
former has been less exactly determined, and so forth; and more about
arts than sciences, because we more frequently doubt respecting the
former.

So then Deliberation takes place in such matters as are under general
laws, but still uncertain how in any given case they will issue,
_i.e._ in which there is some indefiniteness; and for great matters we
associate coadjutors in counsel, distrusting our ability to settle them
alone.

Further, we deliberate not about Ends, but Means to Ends. No physician,
for instance, deliberates whether he will cure, nor orator whether
he will persuade, nor statesman whether he will produce a good
constitution, nor in fact any man in any other function about his
particular End; but having set before them a certain End they look how
and through what means it may be accomplished: if there is a choice of
means, they examine further which are easiest and most creditable; or,
if there is but one means of accomplishing the object, then how it may
be through this, this again through what, till they come to the first
cause; and this will be the last found; for a man engaged in a process
of deliberation seems to seek and analyse, as a man, to solve a
problem, analyses the figure given him. And plainly not every search is
Deliberation, those in mathematics to wit, but every Deliberation is
a search, and the last step in the analysis is the first in the
constructive process. And if in the course of their search men come upon
an impossibility, they give it up; if money, for instance, be necessary,
but cannot be got: but if the thing appears possible they then attempt
to do it.

And by possible I mean what may be done through our own instrumentality
(of course what may be done through our friends is through our own
instrumentality in a certain sense, because the origination in such
cases rests with us). And the object of search is sometimes the
necessary instruments, sometimes the method of using them; and similarly
in the rest sometimes through what, and sometimes how or through what.

So it seems, as has been said, that Man is the originator of his
actions; and Deliberation has for its object whatever may be done
through one's own instrumentality, and the actions are with a view to
other things; and so it is, not the End, but the Means to Ends on which
Deliberation is employed.

[Sidenote: III3a]

Nor, again, is it employed on matters of detail, as whether the
substance before me is bread, or has been properly cooked; for these
come under the province of sense, and if a man is to be always
deliberating, he may go on _ad infinitum_.

Further, exactly the same matter is the object both of Deliberation
and Moral Choice; but that which is the object of Moral Choice is
thenceforward separated off and definite, because by object of Moral
Choice is denoted that which after Deliberation has been preferred to
something else: for each man leaves off searching how he shall do a
thing when he has brought the origination up to himself, _i.e_. to the
governing principle in himself, because it is this which makes the
choice. A good illustration of this is furnished by the old regal
constitutions which Homer drew from, in which the Kings would announce
to the commonalty what they had determined before.

Now since that which is the object of Moral Choice is something in our
own power, which is the object of deliberation and the grasping of the
Will, Moral Choice must be "a grasping after something in our own power
consequent upon Deliberation:" because after having deliberated we
decide, and then grasp by our Will in accordance with the result of our
deliberation.

Let this be accepted as a sketch of the nature and object of Moral
Choice, that object being "Means to Ends."

[Sidenote: IV] That Wish has for its object-matter the End, has been
already stated; but there are two opinions respecting it; some thinking
that its object is real good, others whatever impresses the mind with a
notion of good.

Now those who maintain that the object of Wish is real good are beset by
this difficulty, that what is wished for by him who chooses wrongly is
not really an object of Wish (because, on their theory, if it is an
object of wish, it must be good, but it is, in the case supposed, evil).
Those who maintain, on the contrary, that that which impresses the mind
with a notion of good is properly the object of Wish, have to meet this
difficulty, that there is nothing naturally an object of Wish but to
each individual whatever seems good to him; now different people have
different notions, and it may chance contrary ones.

But, if these opinions do not satisfy us, may we not say that,
abstractedly and as a matter of objective truth, the really good is the
object of Wish, but to each individual whatever impresses his mind with
the notion of good. And so to the good man that is an object of Wish
which is really and truly so, but to the bad man anything may be; just
as physically those things are wholesome to the healthy which are really
so, but other things to the sick. And so too of bitter and sweet, and
hot and heavy, and so on. For the good man judges in every instance
correctly, and in every instance the notion conveyed to his mind is the
true one.

For there are fair and pleasant things peculiar to, and so varying with,
each state; and perhaps the most distinguishing characteristic of the
good man is his seeing the truth in every instance, he being, in fact,
the rule and measure of these matters.

The multitude of men seem to be deceived by reason of pleasure, because
though it is not really a good it impresses their minds with the notion
of goodness, so they choose what is pleasant as good and avoid pain as
an evil.

Now since the End is the object of Wish, and the means to the End of
Deliberation and Moral Choice, the actions regarding these matters
must be in the way of Moral Choice, _i.e._ voluntary: but the acts of
working out the virtues are such actions, and therefore Virtue is in our
power.

And so too is Vice: because wherever it is in our power to do it is also
in our power to forbear doing, and _vice versâ_: therefore if the doing
(being in a given case creditable) is in our power, so too is the
forbearing (which is in the same case discreditable), and _vice versâ_.

But if it is in our power to do and to forbear doing what is creditable
or the contrary, and these respectively constitute the being good or
bad, then the being good or vicious characters is in our power.

As for the well-known saying, "No man voluntarily is wicked or
involuntarily happy," it is partly true, partly false; for no man is
happy against his will, of course, but wickedness is voluntary. Or must
we dispute the statements lately made, and not say that Man is the
originator or generator of his actions as much as of his children?

But if this is matter of plain manifest fact, and we cannot refer our
actions to any other originations beside those in our own power, those
things must be in our own power, and so voluntary, the originations of
which are in ourselves.

Moreover, testimony seems to be borne to these positions both privately
by individuals, and by law-givers too, in that they chastise and punish
those who do wrong (unless they do so on compulsion, or by reason of
ignorance which is not self-caused), while they honour those who act
rightly, under the notion of being likely to encourage the latter and
restrain the former. But such things as are not in our own power, _i.e._
not voluntary, no one thinks of encouraging us to do, knowing it to be
of no avail for one to have been persuaded not to be hot (for instance),
or feel pain, or be hungry, and so forth, because we shall have those
sensations all the same.

And what makes the case stronger is this: that they chastise for the
very fact of ignorance, when it is thought to be self-caused; to the
drunken, for instance, penalties are double, because the origination in
such case lies in a man's own self: for he might have helped getting
drunk, and this is the cause of his ignorance.

[Sidenote: III4_a_] Again, those also who are ignorant of legal
regulations which they are bound to know, and which are not hard to
know, they chastise; and similarly in all other cases where neglect is
thought to be the cause of the ignorance, under the notion that it was
in their power to prevent their ignorance, because they might have paid
attention.

But perhaps a man is of such a character that he cannot attend to such
things: still men are themselves the causes of having become such
characters by living carelessly, and also of being unjust or destitute
of self-control, the former by doing evil actions, the latter by
spending their time in drinking and such-like; because the particular
acts of working form corresponding characters, as is shown by those who
are practising for any contest or particular course of action, for such
men persevere in the acts of working.

As for the plea, that a man did not know that habits are produced
from separate acts of working, we reply, such ignorance is a mark of
excessive stupidity.

Furthermore, it is wholly irrelevant to say that the man who acts
unjustly or dissolutely does not _wish_ to attain the habits of these
vices: for if a man wittingly does those things whereby he must become
unjust he is to all intents and purposes unjust voluntarily; but he
cannot with a wish cease to be unjust and become just. For, to take the
analogous case, the sick man cannot with a wish be well again, yet in
a supposable case he is voluntarily ill because he has produced his
sickness by living intemperately and disregarding his physicians. There
was a time then when he might have helped being ill, but now he has let
himself go he cannot any longer; just as he who has let a stone out of
his hand cannot recall it, and yet it rested with him to aim and throw
it, because the origination was in his power. Just so the unjust man,
and he who has lost all self-control, might originally have helped being
what they are, and so they are voluntarily what they are; but now that
they are become so they no longer have the power of being otherwise.

And not only are mental diseases voluntary, but the bodily are so in
some men, whom we accordingly blame: for such as are naturally deformed
no one blames, only such as are so by reason of want of exercise, and
neglect: and so too of weakness and maiming: no one would think of
upbraiding, but would rather compassionate, a man who is blind by
nature, or from disease, or from an accident; but every one would blame
him who was so from excess of wine, or any other kind of intemperance.
It seems, then, that in respect of bodily diseases, those which depend
on ourselves are censured, those which do not are not censured; and if
so, then in the case of the mental disorders, those which are censured
must depend upon ourselves.

[Sidenote: III4_b_] But suppose a man to say, "that (by our own
admission) all men aim at that which conveys to their minds an
impression of good, and that men have no control over this impression,
but that the End impresses each with a notion correspondent to his own
individual character; that to be sure if each man is in a way the cause
of his own moral state, so he will be also of the kind of impression he
receives: whereas, if this is not so, no one is the cause to himself of
doing evil actions, but he does them by reason of ignorance of the true
End, supposing that through their means he will secure the chief good.
Further, that this aiming at the End is no matter of one's own choice,
but one must be born with a power of mental vision, so to speak, whereby
to judge fairly and choose that which is really good; and he is blessed
by nature who has this naturally well: because it is the most important
thing and the fairest, and what a man cannot get or learn from another
but will have such as nature has given it; and for this to be so given
well and fairly would be excellence of nature in the highest and truest
sense."

If all this be true, how will Virtue be a whit more voluntary than Vice?
Alike to the good man and the bad, the End gives its impression and is
fixed by nature or howsoever you like to say, and they act so and so,
referring everything else to this End.

Whether then we suppose that the End impresses each man's mind with
certain notions not merely by nature, but that there is somewhat also
dependent on himself; or that the End is given by nature, and yet Virtue
is voluntary because the good man does all the rest voluntarily, Vice
must be equally so; because his own agency equally attaches to the bad
man in the actions, even if not in the selection of the End.

If then, as is commonly said, the Virtues are voluntary (because we at
least co-operate in producing our moral states, and we assume the End
to be of a certain kind according as we are ourselves of certain
characters), the Vices must be voluntary also, because the cases are
exactly similar.

Well now, we have stated generally respecting the Moral Virtues, the
genus (in outline), that they are mean states, and that they are habits,
and how they are formed, and that they are of themselves calculated to
act upon the circumstances out of which they were formed, and that they
are in our own power and voluntary, and are to be done so as right
Reason may direct.

[Sidenote: III5_a_] But the particular actions and the habits are not
voluntary in the same sense; for of the actions we are masters from
beginning to end (supposing of course a knowledge of the particular
details), but only of the origination of the habits, the addition by
small particular accessions not being cognisiable (as is the case with
sicknesses): still they are voluntary because it rested with us to use
our circumstances this way or that.

Here we will resume the particular discussion of the Moral Virtues,
and say what they are, what is their object-matter, and how they stand
respectively related to it: of course their number will be thereby
shown. First, then, of Courage. Now that it is a mean state, in respect
of fear and boldness, has been already said: further, the objects of our
fears are obviously things fearful or, in a general way of statement,
evils; which accounts for the common definition of fear, viz.
"expectation of evil."

Of course we fear evils of all kinds: disgrace, for instance, poverty,
disease, desolateness, death; but not all these seem to be the
object-matter of the Brave man, because there are things which to fear
is right and noble, and not to fear is base; disgrace, for example,
since he who fears this is a good man and has a sense of honour, and he
who does not fear it is shameless (though there are those who call him
Brave by analogy, because he somewhat resembles the Brave man who agrees
with him in being free from fear); but poverty, perhaps, or disease, and
in fact whatever does not proceed from viciousness, nor is attributable
to his own fault, a man ought not to fear: still, being fearless in
respect of these would not constitute a man Brave in the proper sense of
the term.

Yet we do apply the term in right of the similarity of the cases; for
there are men who, though timid in the dangers of war, are liberal men
and are stout enough to face loss of wealth.

And, again, a man is not a coward for fearing insult to his wife or
children, or envy, or any such thing; nor is he a Brave man for being
bold when going to be scourged.

What kind of fearful things then do constitute the object-matter of the
Brave man? first of all, must they not be the greatest, since no man is
more apt to withstand what is dreadful. Now the object of the greatest
dread is death, because it is the end of all things, and the dead man is
thought to be capable neither of good nor evil. Still it would seem
that the Brave man has not for his object-matter even death in every
circumstance; on the sea, for example, or in sickness: in what
circumstances then? must it not be in the most honourable? now such is
death in war, because it is death in the greatest and most honourable
danger; and this is confirmed by the honours awarded in communities, and
by monarchs.

He then may be most properly denominated Brave who is fearless in
respect of honourable death and such sudden emergencies as threaten
death; now such specially are those which arise in the course of war.

[Sidenote: 1115b] It is not meant but that the Brave man will be
fearless also on the sea (and in sickness), but not in the same way as
sea-faring men; for these are light-hearted and hopeful by reason of
their experience, while landsmen though Brave are apt to give themselves
up for lost and shudder at the notion of such a death: to which it
should be added that Courage is exerted in circumstances which admit
of doing something to help one's self, or in which death would be
honourable; now neither of these requisites attach to destruction by
drowning or sickness.



VII


Again, fearful is a term of relation, the same thing not being so to
all, and there is according to common parlance somewhat so fearful as to
be beyond human endurance: this of course would be fearful to every
man of sense, but those objects which are level to the capacity of
man differ in magnitude and admit of degrees, so too the objects of
confidence or boldness.

Now the Brave man cannot be frighted from his propriety (but of course
only so far as he is man); fear such things indeed he will, but he will
stand up against them as he ought and as right reason may direct, with a
view to what is honourable, because this is the end of the virtue.

Now it is possible to fear these things too much, or too little, or
again to fear what is not really fearful as if it were such. So the
errors come to be either that a man fears when he ought not to fear at
all, or that he fears in an improper way, or at a wrong time, and so
forth; and so too in respect of things inspiring confidence. He is
Brave then who withstands, and fears, and is bold, in respect of right
objects, from a right motive, in right manner, and at right times:
since the Brave man suffers or acts as he ought and as right reason may
direct.

Now the end of every separate act of working is that which accords
with the habit, and so to the Brave man Courage; which is honourable;
therefore such is also the End, since the character of each is
determined by the End.

So honour is the motive from which the Brave man withstands things
fearful and performs the acts which accord with Courage.

Of the characters on the side of Excess, he who exceeds in utter absence
of fear has no appropriate name (I observed before that many states have
none), but he would be a madman or inaccessible to pain if he feared
nothing, neither earthquake, nor the billows, as they tell of the Celts.

He again who exceeds in confidence in respect of things fearful is rash.
He is thought moreover to be a braggart, and to advance unfounded claims
to the character of Brave: the relation which the Brave man really bears
to objects of fear this man wishes to appear to bear, and so imitates
him in whatever points he can; for this reason most of them exhibit a
curious mixture of rashness and cowardice; because, affecting rashness
in these circumstances, they do not withstand what is truly fearful.

[Sidenote: III6_a_] The man moreover who exceeds in feeling fear is a
coward, since there attach to him the circumstances of fearing wrong
objects, in wrong ways, and so forth. He is deficient also in feeling
confidence, but he is most clearly seen as exceeding in the case of
pains; he is a fainthearted kind of man, for he fears all things: the
Brave man is just the contrary, for boldness is the property of the
light-hearted and hopeful.

So the coward, the rash, and the Brave man have exactly the same
object-matter, but stand differently related to it: the two
first-mentioned respectively exceed and are deficient, the last is in a
mean state and as he ought to be. The rash again are precipitate, and,
being eager before danger, when actually in it fall away, while the
Brave are quick and sharp in action, but before are quiet and composed.

Well then, as has been said, Courage is a mean state in respect of
objects inspiring boldness or fear, in the circumstances which have been
stated, and the Brave man chooses his line and withstands danger either
because to do so is honourable, or because not to do so is base. But
dying to escape from poverty, or the pangs of love, or anything that is
simply painful, is the act not of a Brave man but of a coward; because
it is mere softness to fly from what is toilsome, and the suicide braves
the terrors of death not because it is honourable but to get out of the
reach of evil.


VIII

Courage proper is somewhat of the kind I have described, but there are
dispositions, differing in five ways, which also bear in common parlance
the name of Courage.

We will take first that which bears most resemblance to the true, the
Courage of Citizenship, so named because the motives which are thought
to actuate the members of a community in braving danger are the
penalties and disgrace held out by the laws to cowardice, and the
dignities conferred on the Brave; which is thought to be the reason
why those are the bravest people among whom cowards are visited with
disgrace and the Brave held in honour.

Such is the kind of Courage Homer exhibits in his characters; Diomed and
Hector for example. The latter says,

 "Polydamas will be the first to fix
  Disgrace upon me."

Diomed again,

 "For Hector surely will hereafter say,
  Speaking in Troy, Tydides by my hand"--

This I say most nearly resembles the Courage before spoken of, because
it arises from virtue, from a feeling of shame, and a desire of what is
noble (that is, of honour), and avoidance of disgrace which is base. In
the same rank one would be inclined to place those also who act under
compulsion from their commanders; yet are they really lower, because not
a sense of honour but fear is the motive from which they act, and what
they seek to avoid is not that which is base but that which is simply
painful: commanders do in fact compel their men sometimes, as Hector
says (to quote Homer again),

  "But whomsoever I shall find cowering afar from the fight,
  The teeth of dogs he shall by no means escape."

[Sidenote: III6_h_] Those commanders who station staunch troops by
doubtful ones, or who beat their men if they flinch, or who draw their
troops up in line with the trenches, or other similar obstacles,
in their rear, do in effect the same as Hector, for they all use
compulsion.

But a man is to be Brave, not on compulsion, but from a sense of honour.

In the next place, Experience and Skill in the various particulars is
thought to be a species of Courage: whence Socrates also thought that
Courage was knowledge.

This quality is exhibited of course by different men under different
circumstances, but in warlike matters, with which we are now concerned,
it is exhibited by the soldiers ("the regulars"): for there are, it
would seem, many things in war of no real importance which these have
been constantly used to see; so they have a show of Courage because
other people are not aware of the real nature of these things. Then
again by reason of their skill they are better able than any others to
inflict without suffering themselves, because they are able to use their
arms and have such as are most serviceable both with a view to offence
and defence: so that their case is parallel to that of armed men
fighting with unarmed or trained athletes with amateurs, since in
contests of this kind those are the best fighters, not who are the
bravest men, but who are the strongest and are in the best condition.

In fact, the regular troops come to be cowards whenever the danger is
greater than their means of meeting it; supposing, for example, that
they are inferior in numbers and resources: then they are the first to
fly, but the mere militia stand and fall on the ground (which as you
know really happened at the Hermæum), for in the eyes of these flight
was disgraceful and death preferable to safety bought at such a price:
while "the regulars" originally went into the danger under a notion
of their own superiority, but on discovering their error they took to
flight, having greater fear of death than of disgrace; but this is not
the feeling of the Brave man.

Thirdly, mere Animal Spirit is sometimes brought under the term Courage:
they are thought to be Brave who are carried on by mere Animal Spirit,
as are wild beasts against those who have wounded them, because in fact
the really Brave have much Spirit, there being nothing like it for going
at danger of any kind; whence those frequent expressions in Homer,
"infused strength into his spirit," "roused his strength and spirit," or
again, "and keen strength in his nostrils," "his blood boiled:" for all
these seem to denote the arousing and impetuosity of the Animal Spirit.

[Sidenote: III7_a_] Now they that are truly Brave act from a sense of
honour, and this Animal Spirit co-operates with them; but wild beasts
from pain, that is because they have been wounded, or are frightened;
since if they are quietly in their own haunts, forest or marsh, they do
not attack men. Surely they are not Brave because they rush into danger
when goaded on by pain and mere Spirit, without any view of the danger:
else would asses be Brave when they are hungry, for though beaten they
will not then leave their pasture: profligate men besides do many bold
actions by reason of their lust. We may conclude then that they are not
Brave who are goaded on to meet danger by pain and mere Spirit; but
still this temper which arises from Animal Spirit appears to be most
natural, and would be Courage of the true kind if it could have added
to it moral choice and the proper motive. So men also are pained by a
feeling of anger, and take pleasure in revenge; but they who fight from
these causes may be good fighters, but they are not truly Brave (in
that they do not act from a sense of honour, nor as reason directs, but
merely from the present feeling), still they bear some resemblance to
that character.

Nor, again, are the Sanguine and Hopeful therefore Brave: since their
boldness in dangers arises from their frequent victories over numerous
foes. The two characters are alike, however, in that both are confident;
but then the Brave are so from the afore-mentioned causes, whereas these
are so from a settled conviction of their being superior and not likely
to suffer anything in return (they who are intoxicated do much the
same, for they become hopeful when in that state); but when the event
disappoints their expectations they run away: now it was said to be the
character of a Brave man to withstand things which are fearful to man
or produce that impression, because it is honourable so to do and the
contrary is dishonourable.

For this reason it is thought to be a greater proof of Courage to be
fearless and undisturbed under the pressure of sudden fear than under
that which may be anticipated, because Courage then comes rather from a
fixed habit, or less from preparation: since as to foreseen dangers a
man might take his line even from calculation and reasoning, but in
those which are sudden he will do so according to his fixed habit of
mind.

Fifthly and lastly, those who are acting under Ignorance have a show
of Courage and are not very far from the Hopeful; but still they are
inferior inasmuch as they have no opinion of themselves; which the
others have, and therefore stay and contest a field for some little
time; but they who have been deceived fly the moment they know things to
be otherwise than they supposed, which the Argives experienced when they
fell on the Lacedæmonians, taking them for the men of Sicyon. We have
described then what kind of men the Brave are, and what they who are
thought to be, but are not really, Brave.

[Sidenote: IX]

It must be remarked, however, that though Courage has for its
object-matter boldness and fear it has not both equally so, but objects
of fear much more than the former; for he that under pressure of these
is undisturbed and stands related to them as he ought is better entitled
to the name of Brave than he who is properly affected towards objects
of confidence. So then men are termed Brave for withstanding painful
things.

It follows that Courage involves pain and is justly praised, since it
is a harder matter to withstand things that are painful than to abstain
from such as are pleasant.

[Sidenote: 1117_b_]

It must not be thought but that the End and object of Courage is
pleasant, but it is obscured by the surrounding circumstances: which
happens also in the gymnastic games; to the boxers the End is pleasant
with a view to which they act, I mean the crown and the honours; but the
receiving the blows they do is painful and annoying to flesh and blood,
and so is all the labour they have to undergo; and, as these drawbacks
are many, the object in view being small appears to have no pleasantness
in it.

If then we may say the same of Courage, of course death and wounds must
be painful to the Brave man and against his will: still he endures these
because it is honourable so to do or because it is dishonourable not to
do so. And the more complete his virtue and his happiness so much the
more will he be pained at the notion of death: since to such a man as
he is it is best worth while to live, and he with full consciousness is
deprived of the greatest goods by death, and this is a painful idea. But
he is not the less Brave for feeling it to be so, nay rather it may be
he is shown to be more so because he chooses the honour that may be
reaped in war in preference to retaining safe possession of these other
goods. The fact is that to act with pleasure does not belong to all the
virtues, except so far as a man realises the End of his actions.

But there is perhaps no reason why not such men should make the best
soldiers, but those who are less truly Brave but have no other good to
care for: these being ready to meet danger and bartering their lives
against small gain.

Let thus much be accepted as sufficient on the subject of Courage; the
true nature of which it is not difficult to gather, in outline at least,
from what has been said.

[Sidenote: X]

Next let us speak of Perfected Self-Mastery, which seems to claim the
next place to Courage, since these two are the Excellences of the
Irrational part of the Soul.

That it is a mean state, having for its object-matter Pleasures, we have
already said (Pains being in fact its object-matter in a less degree
and dissimilar manner), the state of utter absence of self-control has
plainly the same object-matter; the next thing then is to determine what
kind of Pleasures.

Let Pleasures then be understood to be divided into mental and bodily:
instances of the former being love of honour or of learning: it being
plain that each man takes pleasure in that of these two objects which he
has a tendency to like, his body being no way affected but rather his
intellect. Now men are not called perfectly self-mastering or wholly
destitute of self-control in respect of pleasures of this class: nor in
fact in respect of any which are not bodily; those for example who love
to tell long stories, and are prosy, and spend their days about
mere chance matters, we call gossips but not wholly destitute of
self-control, nor again those who are pained at the loss of money or
friends.

[Sidenote: 1118_a_]

It is bodily Pleasures then which are the object-matter of Perfected
Self-Mastery, but not even all these indifferently: I mean, that they
who take pleasure in objects perceived by the Sight, as colours, and
forms, and painting, are not denominated men of Perfected Self-Mastery,
or wholly destitute of self-control; and yet it would seem that one may
take pleasure even in such objects, as one ought to do, or excessively,
or too little.

So too of objects perceived by the sense of Hearing; no one applies the
terms before quoted respectively to those who are excessively pleased
with musical tunes or acting, or to those who take such pleasure as they
ought.

Nor again to those persons whose pleasure arises from the sense
of Smell, except incidentally: I mean, we do not say men have no
self-control because they take pleasure in the scent of fruit, or
flowers, or incense, but rather when they do so in the smells of
unguents and sauces: since men destitute of self-control take pleasure
herein, because hereby the objects of their lusts are recalled to their
imagination (you may also see other men take pleasure in the smell of
food when they are hungry): but to take pleasure in such is a mark of
the character before named since these are objects of desire to him.

Now not even brutes receive pleasure in right of these senses, except
incidentally. I mean, it is not the scent of hares' flesh but the eating
it which dogs take pleasure in, perception of which pleasure is caused
by the sense of Smell. Or again, it is not the lowing of the ox but
eating him which the lion likes; but of the fact of his nearness the
lion is made sensible by the lowing, and so he appears to take pleasure
in this. In like manner, he has no pleasure in merely seeing or finding
a stag or wild goat, but in the prospect of a meal.

The habits of Perfect Self-Mastery and entire absence of self-control
have then for their object-matter such pleasures as brutes also share
in, for which reason they are plainly servile and brutish: they are
Touch and Taste.

But even Taste men seem to make little or no use of; for to the sense of
Taste belongs the distinguishing of flavours; what men do, in fact, who
are testing the quality of wines or seasoning "made dishes."

But men scarcely take pleasure at all in these things, at least those
whom we call destitute of self-control do not, but only in the actual
enjoyment which arises entirely from the sense of Touch, whether in
eating or in drinking, or in grosser lusts. This accounts for the wish
said to have been expressed once by a great glutton, "that his throat
had been formed longer than a crane's neck," implying that his pleasure
was derived from the Touch.

[Sidenote: 1118b] The sense then with which is connected the habit of
absence of self-control is the most common of all the senses, and this
habit would seem to be justly a matter of reproach, since it attaches to
us not in so far as we are men but in so far as we are animals. Indeed
it is brutish to take pleasure in such things and to like them best of
all; for the most respectable of the pleasures arising from the touch
have been set aside; those, for instance, which occur in the course of
gymnastic training from the rubbing and the warm bath: because the touch
of the man destitute of self-control is not indifferently of _any_ part
of the body but only of particular parts.

XI

Now of lusts or desires some are thought to be universal, others
peculiar and acquired; thus desire for food is natural since every one
who really needs desires also food, whether solid or liquid, or both
(and, as Homer says, the man in the prime of youth needs and desires
intercourse with the other sex); but when we come to this or that
particular kind, then neither is the desire universal nor in all men is
it directed to the same objects. And therefore the conceiving of such
desires plainly attaches to us as individuals. It must be admitted,
however, that there is something natural in it: because different things
are pleasant to different men and a preference of some particular
objects to chance ones is universal. Well then, in the case of the
desires which are strictly and properly natural few men go wrong and all
in one direction, that is, on the side of too much: I mean, to eat and
drink of such food as happens to be on the table till one is overfilled
is exceeding in quantity the natural limit, since the natural desire
is simply a supply of a real deficiency. For this reason these men are
called belly-mad, as filling it beyond what they ought, and it is the
slavish who become of this character.

But in respect of the peculiar pleasures many men go wrong and in many
different ways; for whereas the term "fond of so and so" implies either
taking pleasure in wrong objects, or taking pleasure excessively, or as
the mass of men do, or in a wrong way, they who are destitute of all
self-control exceed in all these ways; that is to say, they take
pleasure in some things in which they ought not to do so (because they
are properly objects of detestation), and in such as it is right to take
pleasure in they do so more than they ought and as the mass of men do.

Well then, that excess with respect to pleasures is absence of
self-control, and blameworthy, is plain. But viewing these habits on the
side of pains, we find that a man is not said to have the virtue for
withstanding them (as in the case of Courage), nor the vice for not
withstanding them; but the man destitute of self-control is such,
because he is pained more than he ought to be at not obtaining things
which are pleasant (and thus his pleasure produces pain to him), and the
man of Perfected Self-Mastery is such in virtue of not being pained by
their absence, that is, by having to abstain from what is pleasant.

[Sidenote:III9a] Now the man destitute of self-control desires either
all pleasant things indiscriminately or those which are specially
pleasant, and he is impelled by his desire to choose these things in
preference to all others; and this involves pain, not only when he
misses the attainment of his objects but, in the very desiring them,
since all desire is accompanied by pain. Surely it is a strange case
this, being pained by reason of pleasure.

As for men who are defective on the side of pleasure, who take
less pleasure in things than they ought, they are almost imaginary
characters, because such absence of sensual perception is not natural to
man: for even the other animals distinguish between different kinds of
food, and like some kinds and dislike others. In fact, could a man be
found who takes no pleasure in anything and to whom all things are
alike, he would be far from being human at all: there is no name for
such a character because it is simply imaginary.

But the man of Perfected Self-Mastery is in the mean with respect to
these objects: that is to say, he neither takes pleasure in the things
which delight the vicious man, and in fact rather dislikes them, nor at
all in improper objects; nor to any great degree in any object of the
class; nor is he pained at their absence; nor does he desire them; or,
if he does, only in moderation, and neither more than he ought, nor at
improper times, and so forth; but such things as are conducive to health
and good condition of body, being also pleasant, these he will grasp at
in moderation and as he ought to do, and also such other pleasant things
as do not hinder these objects, and are not unseemly or disproportionate
to his means; because he that should grasp at such would be liking such
pleasures more than is proper; but the man of Perfected Self-Mastery
is not of this character, but regulates his desires by the dictates of
right reason.

XII

Now the vice of being destitute of all Self-Control seems to be more
truly voluntary than Cowardice, because pleasure is the cause of the
former and pain of the latter, and pleasure is an object of choice,
pain of avoidance. And again, pain deranges and spoils the natural
disposition of its victim, whereas pleasure has no such effect and is
more voluntary and therefore more justly open to reproach.

It is so also for the following reason; that it is easier to be inured
by habit to resist the objects of pleasure, there being many things of
this kind in life and the process of habituation being unaccompanied by
danger; whereas the case is the reverse as regards the objects of fear.

Again, Cowardice as a confirmed habit would seem to be voluntary in
a different way from the particular instances which form the habit;
because it is painless, but these derange the man by reason of pain so
that he throws away his arms and otherwise behaves himself unseemly,
for which reason they are even thought by some to exercise a power of
compulsion.

But to the man destitute of Self-Control the particular instances are on
the contrary quite voluntary, being done with desire and direct exertion
of the will, but the general result is less voluntary: since no man
desires to form the habit.

[Sidenote: 1119b]

The name of this vice (which signifies etymologically unchastened-ness)
we apply also to the faults of children, there being a certain
resemblance between the cases: to which the name is primarily applied,
and to which secondarily or derivatively, is not relevant to the present
subject, but it is evident that the later in point of time must get the
name from the earlier. And the metaphor seems to be a very good one;
for whatever grasps after base things, and is liable to great increase,
ought to be chastened; and to this description desire and the child
answer most truly, in that children also live under the direction of
desire and the grasping after what is pleasant is most prominently seen
in these.

Unless then the appetite be obedient and subjected to the governing
principle it will become very great: for in the fool the grasping after
what is pleasant is insatiable and undiscriminating; and every acting
out of the desire increases the kindred habit, and if the desires are
great and violent in degree they even expel Reason entirely; therefore
they ought to be moderate and few, and in no respect to be opposed
to Reason. Now when the appetite is in such a state we denominate it
obedient and chastened.

In short, as the child ought to live with constant regard to the orders
of its educator, so should the appetitive principle with regard to those
of Reason.

So then in the man of Perfected Self-Mastery, the appetitive principle
must be accordant with Reason: for what is right is the mark at which
both principles aim: that is to say, the man of perfected self-mastery
desires what he ought in right manner and at right times, which is
exactly what Reason directs. Let this be taken for our account of
Perfected Self-Mastery.




BOOK IV

I

We will next speak of Liberality. Now this is thought to be the mean
state, having for its object-matter Wealth: I mean, the Liberal man is
praised not in the circumstances of war, nor in those which constitute
the character of perfected self-mastery, nor again in judicial
decisions, but in respect of giving and receiving Wealth, chiefly the
former. By the term Wealth I mean "all those things whose worth is
measured by money."

Now the states of excess and defect in regard of Wealth are respectively
Prodigality and Stinginess: the latter of these terms we attach
invariably to those who are over careful about Wealth, but the former we
apply sometimes with a complex notion; that is to say, we give the name
to those who fail of self-control and spend money on the unrestrained
gratification of their passions; and this is why they are thought to be
most base, because they have many vices at once.

[Sidenote: 1120a]

It must be noted, however, that this is not a strict and proper use of
the term, since its natural etymological meaning is to denote him who
has one particular evil, viz. the wasting his substance: he is unsaved
(as the term literally denotes) who is wasting away by his own fault;
and this he really may be said to be; the destruction of his substance
is thought to be a kind of wasting of himself, since these things
are the means of living. Well, this is our acceptation of the term
Prodigality.

Again. Whatever things are for use may be used well or ill, and Wealth
belongs to this class. He uses each particular thing best who has the
virtue to whose province it belongs: so that he will use Wealth best
who has the virtue respecting Wealth, that is to say, the Liberal
man. Expenditure and giving are thought to be the using of money, but
receiving and keeping one would rather call the possessing of it. And so
the giving to proper persons is more characteristic of the Liberal man,
than the receiving from proper quarters and forbearing to receive
from the contrary. In fact generally, doing well by others is more
characteristic of virtue than being done well by, and doing things
positively honourable than forbearing to do things dishonourable;
and any one may see that the doing well by others and doing things
positively honourable attaches to the act of giving, but to that of
receiving only the being done well by or forbearing to do what is
dishonourable.

Besides, thanks are given to him who gives, not to him who merely
forbears to receive, and praise even more. Again, forbearing to receive
is easier than giving, the case of being too little freehanded with
one's own being commoner than taking that which is not one's own.

And again, it is they who give that are denominated Liberal, while they
who forbear to receive are commended, not on the score of Liberality but
of just dealing, while for receiving men are not, in fact, praised at
all.

And the Liberal are liked almost best of all virtuous characters,
because they are profitable to others, and this their profitableness
consists in their giving.

Furthermore: all the actions done in accordance with virtue are
honourable, and done from the motive of honour: and the Liberal man,
therefore, will give from a motive of honour, and will give rightly;
I mean, to proper persons, in right proportion, at right times, and
whatever is included in the term "right giving:" and this too with
positive pleasure, or at least without pain, since whatever is done in
accordance with virtue is pleasant or at least not unpleasant, most
certainly not attended with positive pain.

But the man who gives to improper people, or not from a motive of honour
but from some other cause, shall be called not Liberal but something
else. Neither shall he be so [Sidenote:1120b] denominated who does it
with pain: this being a sign that he would prefer his wealth to the
honourable action, and this is no part of the Liberal man's character;
neither will such an one receive from improper sources, because the so
receiving is not characteristic of one who values not wealth: nor again
will he be apt to ask, because one who does kindnesses to others does
not usually receive them willingly; but from proper sources (his own
property, for instance) he will receive, doing this not as honourable
but as necessary, that he may have somewhat to give: neither will he be
careless of his own, since it is his wish through these to help others
in need: nor will he give to chance people, that he may have wherewith
to give to those to whom he ought, at right times, and on occasions when
it is honourable so to do.

Again, it is a trait in the Liberal man's character even to exceed
very much in giving so as to leave too little for himself, it being
characteristic of such an one not to have a thought of self.

Now Liberality is a term of relation to a man's means, for the
Liberal-ness depends not on the amount of what is given but on the moral
state of the giver which gives in proportion to his means. There is then
no reason why he should not be the more Liberal man who gives the less
amount, if he has less to give out of.

Again, they are thought to be more Liberal who have inherited, not
acquired for themselves, their means; because, in the first place, they
have never experienced want, and next, all people love most their own
works, just as parents do and poets.

It is not easy for the Liberal man to be rich, since he is neither apt
to receive nor to keep but to lavish, and values not wealth for its own
sake but with a view to giving it away. Hence it is commonly charged
upon fortune that they who most deserve to be rich are least so. Yet
this happens reasonably enough; it is impossible he should have wealth
who does not take any care to have it, just as in any similar case.

Yet he will not give to improper people, nor at wrong times, and so on:
because he would not then be acting in accordance with Liberality, and
if he spent upon such objects, would have nothing to spend on those on
which he ought: for, as I have said before, he is Liberal who spends in
proportion to his means, and on proper objects, while he who does so
in excess is prodigal (this is the reason why we never call despots
prodigal, because it does not seem to be easy for them by their gifts
and expenditure to go beyond their immense possessions).

To sum up then. Since Liberality is a mean state in respect of the
giving and receiving of wealth, the Liberal man will give and spend on
proper objects, and in proper proportion, in great things and in small
alike, and all this with pleasure to himself; also he will receive from
right sources, and in right proportion: because, as the virtue is a mean
state in respect of both, he will do both as he ought, and, in fact,
upon proper giving follows the correspondent receiving, while that which
is not such is contrary to it. (Now those which follow one another come
to co-exist in the same person, those which are contraries plainly do
not.)

[Sidenote:1121a] Again, should it happen to him to spend money beyond
what is needful, or otherwise than is well, he will be vexed, but only
moderately and as he ought; for feeling pleasure and pain at right
objects, and in right manner, is a property of Virtue.

The Liberal man is also a good man to have for a partner in respect of
wealth: for he can easily be wronged, since he values not wealth, and
is more vexed at not spending where he ought to have done so than at
spending where he ought not, and he relishes not the maxim of Simonides.

But the Prodigal man goes wrong also in these points, for he is neither
pleased nor pained at proper objects or in proper manner, which will
become more plain as we proceed. We have said already that Prodigality
and Stinginess are respectively states of excess and defect, and this in
two things, giving and receiving (expenditure of course we class under
giving). Well now, Prodigality exceeds in giving and forbearing to
receive and is deficient in receiving, while Stinginess is deficient in
giving and exceeds in receiving, but it is in small things.

The two parts of Prodigality, to be sure, do not commonly go together;
it is not easy, I mean, to give to all if you receive from none, because
private individuals thus giving will soon find their means run short,
and such are in fact thought to be prodigal. He that should combine both
would seem to be no little superior to the Stingy man: for he may be
easily cured, both by advancing in years, and also by the want of means,
and he may come thus to the mean: he has, you see, already the _facts_
of the Liberal man, he gives and forbears to receive, only he does
neither in right manner or well. So if he could be wrought upon by
habituation in this respect, or change in any other way, he would be a
real Liberal man, for he will give to those to whom he should, and will
forbear to receive whence he ought not. This is the reason too why he is
thought not to be low in moral character, because to exceed in giving
and in forbearing to receive is no sign of badness or meanness, but only
of folly.

[Sidenote:1121b] Well then, he who is Prodigal in this fashion is
thought far superior to the Stingy man for the aforementioned reasons,
and also because he does good to many, but the Stingy man to no one,
not even to himself. But most Prodigals, as has been said, combine with
their other faults that of receiving from improper sources, and on this
point are Stingy: and they become grasping, because they wish to spend
and cannot do this easily, since their means soon run short and they are
necessitated to get from some other quarter; and then again, because
they care not for what is honourable, they receive recklessly, and from
all sources indifferently, because they desire to give but care not how
or whence. And for this reason their givings are not Liberal, inasmuch
as they are not honourable, nor purely disinterested, nor done in right
fashion; but they oftentimes make those rich who should be poor, and to
those who are quiet respectable kind of people they will give nothing,
but to flatterers, or those who subserve their pleasures in any way,
they will give much. And therefore most of them are utterly devoid
of self-restraint; for as they are open-handed they are liberal in
expenditure upon the unrestrained gratification of their passions, and
turn off to their pleasures because they do not live with reference to
what is honourable.

Thus then the Prodigal, if unguided, slides into these faults; but if he
could get care bestowed on him he might come to the mean and to what is
right.

Stinginess, on the contrary, is incurable: old age, for instance, and
incapacity of any kind, is thought to make people Stingy; and it is more
congenial to human nature than Prodigality, the mass of men being fond
of money rather than apt to give: moreover it extends far and has many
phases, the modes of stinginess being thought to be many. For as it
consists of two things, defect of giving and excess of receiving,
everybody does not have it entire, but it is sometimes divided, and one
class of persons exceed in receiving, the other are deficient in giving.
I mean those who are designated by such appellations as sparing,
close-fisted, niggards, are all deficient in giving; but other men's
property they neither desire nor are willing to receive, in some
instances from a real moderation and shrinking from what is base.

There are some people whose motive, either supposed or alleged, for
keeping their property is this, that they may never be driven to do
anything dishonourable: to this class belongs the skinflint, and every
one of similar character, so named from the excess of not-giving. Others
again decline to receive their neighbour's goods from a motive of fear;
their notion being that it is not easy to take other people's things
yourself without their taking yours: so they are content neither to
receive nor give.

[Sidenote:1122a] The other class again who are Stingy in respect of
receiving exceed in that they receive anything from any source; such as
they who work at illiberal employments, brothel keepers, and such-like,
and usurers who lend small sums at large interest: for all these receive
from improper sources, and improper amounts. Their common characteristic
is base-gaining, since they all submit to disgrace for the sake of gain
and that small; because those who receive great things neither whence
they ought, nor what they ought (as for instance despots who sack cities
and plunder temples), we denominate wicked, impious, and unjust, but not
Stingy.

Now the dicer and bath-plunderer and the robber belong to the class of
the Stingy, for they are given to base gain: both busy themselves and
submit to disgrace for the sake of gain, and the one class incur the
greatest dangers for the sake of their booty, while the others make gain
of their friends to whom they ought to be giving.

So both classes, as wishing to make gain from improper sources, are
given to base gain, and all such receivings are Stingy. And with good
reason is Stinginess called the contrary of Liberality: both because it
is a greater evil than Prodigality, and because men err rather in this
direction than in that of the Prodigality which we have spoken of as
properly and completely such.

Let this be considered as what we have to say respecting Liberality and
the contrary vices.

II

Next in order would seem to come a dissertation on Magnificence,
this being thought to be, like liberality, a virtue having for its
object-matter Wealth; but it does not, like that, extend to all
transactions in respect of Wealth, but only applies to such as are
expensive, and in these circumstances it exceeds liberality in respect
of magnitude, because it is (what the very name in Greek hints at)
fitting expense on a large scale: this term is of course relative: I
mean, the expenditure of equipping and commanding a trireme is not the
same as that of giving a public spectacle: "fitting" of course also is
relative to the individual, and the matter wherein and upon which he has
to spend. And a man is not denominated Magnificent for spending as he
should do in small or ordinary things, as, for instance,

  "Oft to the wandering beggar did I give,"

but for doing so in great matters: that is to say, the Magnificent man
is liberal, but the liberal is not thereby Magnificent. The falling
short of such a state is called Meanness, the exceeding it Vulgar
Profusion, Want of Taste, and so on; which are faulty, not because they
are on an excessive scale in respect of right objects but, because they
show off in improper objects, and in improper manner: of these we will
speak presently. The Magnificent man is like a man of skill, because he
can see what is fitting, and can spend largely in good taste; for, as
we said at the commencement, [Sidenote: 1122b] the confirmed habit is
determined by the separate acts of working, and by its object-matter.

Well, the expenses of the Magnificent man are great and fitting: such
also are his works (because this secures the expenditure being not great
merely, but befitting the work). So then the work is to be proportionate
to the expense, and this again to the work, or even above it: and the
Magnificent man will incur such expenses from the motive of honour, this
being common to all the virtues, and besides he will do it with pleasure
and lavishly; excessive accuracy in calculation being Mean. He will
consider also how a thing may be done most beautifully and fittingly,
rather, than for how much it may be done, and how at the least expense.

So the Magnificent man must be also a liberal man, because the liberal
man will also spend what he ought, and in right manner: but it is the
Great, that is to say tke large scale, which is distinctive of the
Magnificent man, the object-matter of liberality being the same, and
without spending more money than another man he will make the work more
magnificent. I mean, the excellence of a possession and of a work is not
the same: as a piece of property that thing is most valuable which is
worth most, gold for instance; but as a work that which is great and
beautiful, because the contemplation of such an object is admirable,
and so is that which is Magnificent. So the excellence of a work is
Magnificence on a large scale. There are cases of expenditure which we
call honourable, such as are dedicatory offerings to the gods, and the
furnishing their temples, and sacrifices, and in like manner everything
that has reference to the Deity, and all such public matters as are
objects of honourable ambition, as when men think in any case that it is
their duty to furnish a chorus for the stage splendidly, or fit out and
maintain a trireme, or give a general public feast.

Now in all these, as has been already stated, respect is had also to the
rank and the means of the man who is doing them: because they should be
proportionate to these, and befit not the work only but also the doer of
the work. For this reason a poor man cannot be a Magnificent man, since
he has not means wherewith to spend largely and yet becomingly; and if
he attempts it he is a fool, inasmuch as it is out of proportion and
contrary to propriety, whereas to be in accordance with virtue a thing
must be done rightly.

Such expenditure is fitting moreover for those to whom such things
previously belong, either through themselves or through their ancestors
or people with whom they are connected, and to the high-born or people
of high repute, and so on: because all these things imply greatness and
reputation.

So then the Magnificent man is pretty much as I have described him,
and Magnificence consists in such expenditures: because they are the
greatest and most honourable: [Sidenote:1123a] and of private ones such
as come but once for all, marriage to wit, and things of that kind; and
any occasion which engages the interest of the community in general, or
of those who are in power; and what concerns receiving and despatching
strangers; and gifts, and repaying gifts: because the Magnificent man
is not apt to spend upon himself but on the public good, and gifts are
pretty much in the same case as dedicatory offerings.

It is characteristic also of the Magnificent man to furnish his house
suitably to his wealth, for this also in a way reflects credit; and
again, to spend rather upon such works as are of long duration, these
being most honourable. And again, propriety in each case, because the
same things are not suitable to gods and men, nor in a temple and a
tomb. And again, in the case of expenditures, each must be great of its
kind, and great expense on a great object is most magnificent, that is
in any case what is great in these particular things.

There is a difference too between greatness of a work and greatness of
expenditure: for instance, a very beautiful ball or cup is magnificent
as a present to a child, while the price of it is small and almost
mean. Therefore it is characteristic of the Magnificent man to do
magnificently whatever he is about: for whatever is of this kind cannot
be easily surpassed, and bears a proper proportion to the expenditure.

Such then is the Magnificent man.

The man who is in the state of excess, called one of Vulgar Profusion,
is in excess because he spends improperly, as has been said. I mean in
cases requiring small expenditure he lavishes much and shows off out of
taste; giving his club a feast fit for a wedding-party, or if he has to
furnish a chorus for a comedy, giving the actors purple to wear in the
first scene, as did the Megarians. And all such things he will do, not
with a view to that which is really honourable, but to display his
wealth, and because he thinks he shall be admired for these things; and
he will spend little where he ought to spend much, and much where he
should spend little.

The Mean man will be deficient in every case, and even where he has
spent the most he will spoil the whole effect for want of some trifle;
he is procrastinating in all he does, and contrives how he may spend
the least, and does even that with lamentations about the expense, and
thinking that he does all things on a greater scale than he ought.

Of course, both these states are faulty, but they do not involve
disgrace because they are neither hurtful to others nor very unseemly.

III

The very name of Great-mindedness implies, that great things are its
object-matter; and we will first settle what kind of things. It makes no
difference, of course, whether we regard the moral state in the abstract
or as exemplified in an individual.

[Sidenote: 1123b] Well then, he is thought to be Great-minded who values
himself highly and at the same time justly, because he that does so
without grounds is foolish, and no virtuous character is foolish or
senseless. Well, the character I have described is Great-minded. The man
who estimates himself lowly, and at the same time justly, is modest; but
not Great-minded, since this latter quality implies greatness, just as
beauty implies a large bodily conformation while small people are neat
and well made but not beautiful.

Again, he who values himself highly without just grounds is a Vain
man: though the name must not be applied to every case of unduly
high self-estimation. He that values himself below his real worth is
Small-minded, and whether that worth is great, moderate, or small, his
own estimate falls below it. And he is the strongest case of this error
who is really a man of great worth, for what would he have done had his
worth been less?

The Great-minded man is then, as far as greatness is concerned, at
the summit, but in respect of propriety he is in the mean, because he
estimates himself at his real value (the other characters respectively
are in excess and defect). Since then he justly estimates himself at a
high, or rather at the highest possible rate, his character will have
respect specially to one thing: this term "rate" has reference of course
to external goods: and of these we should assume that to be the greatest
which we attribute to the gods, and which is the special object of
desire to those who are in power, and which is the prize proposed to the
most honourable actions: now honour answers to these descriptions, being
the greatest of external goods. So the Great-minded man bears himself as
he ought in respect of honour and dishonour. In fact, without need of
words, the Great-minded plainly have honour for their object-matter:
since honour is what the great consider themselves specially worthy of,
and according to a certain rate.

The Small-minded man is deficient, both as regards himself, and also
as regards the estimation of the Great-minded: while the Vain man is in
excess as regards himself, but does not get beyond the Great-minded
man. Now the Great-minded man, being by the hypothesis worthy of the
greatest things, must be of the highest excellence, since the better a
man is the more is he worth, and he who is best is worth the most: it
follows then, that to be truly Great-minded a man must be good,
and whatever is great in each virtue would seem to belong to the
Great-minded. It would no way correspond with the character of the
Great-minded to flee spreading his hands all abroad; nor to injure any
one; for with what object in view will he do what is base, in whose eyes
nothing is great? in short, if one were to go into particulars, the
Great-minded man would show quite ludicrously unless he were a good man:
he would not be in fact deserving of honour if he were a bad man, honour
being the prize of virtue and given to the good.

This virtue, then, of Great-mindedness seems to be a kind of ornament
of all the other virtues, in that it makes them better and cannot be
without them; and for this reason it is a hard matter to be really and
truly Great-minded; for it cannot be without thorough goodness and
nobleness of character.

[Sidenote:1124a] Honour then and dishonour are specially the
object-matter of the Great-minded man: and at such as is great, and
given by good men, he will be pleased moderately as getting his own, or
perhaps somewhat less for no honour can be quite adequate to perfect
virtue: but still he will accept this because they have nothing higher
to give him. But such as is given by ordinary people and on trifling
grounds he will entirely despise, because these do not come up to his
deserts: and dishonour likewise, because in his case there cannot be
just ground for it.

Now though, as I have said, honour is specially the object-matter of the
Great-minded man, I do not mean but that likewise in respect of wealth
and power, and good or bad fortune of every kind, he will bear himself
with moderation, fall out how they may, and neither in prosperity will
he be overjoyed nor in adversity will he be unduly pained. For not even
in respect of honour does he so bear himself; and yet it is the greatest
of all such objects, since it is the cause of power and wealth being
choiceworthy, for certainly they who have them desire to receive honour
through them. So to whom honour even is a small thing to him will all
other things also be so; and this is why such men are thought to be
supercilious.

It seems too that pieces of good fortune contribute to form this
character of Great-mindedness: I mean, the nobly born, or men of
influence, or the wealthy, are considered to be entitled to honour, for
they are in a position of eminence and whatever is eminent by good is
more entitled to honour: and this is why such circumstances dispose men
rather to Great-mindedness, because they receive honour at the hands of
some men.

Now really and truly the good man alone is entitled to honour; only if
a man unites in himself goodness with these external advantages he is
thought to be more entitled to honour: but they who have them without
also having virtue are not justified in their high estimate of
themselves, nor are they rightly denominated Great-minded; since perfect
virtue is one of the indispensable conditions to such & character.

[Sidenote:1124b] Further, such men become supercilious and insolent, it
not being easy to bear prosperity well without goodness; and not being
able to bear it, and possessed with an idea of their own superiority to
others, they despise them, and do just whatever their fancy prompts; for
they mimic the Great-minded man, though they are not like him, and they
do this in such points as they can, so without doing the actions which
can only flow from real goodness they despise others. Whereas the
Great-minded man despises on good grounds (for he forms his opinions
truly), but the mass of men do it at random.

Moreover, he is not a man to incur little risks, nor does he court
danger, because there are but few things he has a value for; but he will
incur great dangers, and when he does venture he is prodigal of his life
as knowing that there are terms on which it is not worth his while to
live. He is the sort of man to do kindnesses, but he is ashamed to
receive them; the former putting a man in the position of superiority,
the latter in that of inferiority; accordingly he will greatly overpay
any kindness done to him, because the original actor will thus be laid
under obligation and be in the position of the party benefited. Such men
seem likewise to remember those they have done kindnesses to, but not
those from whom they have received them: because he who has received is
inferior to him who has done the kindness and our friend wishes to be
superior; accordingly he is pleased to hear of his own kind acts but not
of those done to himself (and this is why, in Homer, Thetis does
not mention to Jupiter the kindnesses she had done him, nor did the
Lacedæmonians to the Athenians but only the benefits they had received).

Further, it is characteristic of the Great-minded man to ask favours not
at all, or very reluctantly, but to do a service very readily; and to
bear himself loftily towards the great or fortunate, but towards people
of middle station affably; because to be above the former is difficult
and so a grand thing, but to be above the latter is easy; and to be high
and mighty towards the former is not ignoble, but to do it towards those
of humble station would be low and vulgar; it would be like parading
strength against the weak.

And again, not to put himself in the way of honour, nor to go where
others are the chief men; and to be remiss and dilatory, except in the
case of some great honour or work; and to be concerned in few things,
and those great and famous. It is a property of him also to be open,
both in his dislikes and his likings, because concealment is a
consequent of fear. Likewise to be careful for reality rather than
appearance, and talk and act openly (for his contempt for others makes
him a bold man, for which same reason he is apt to speak the truth,
except where the principle of reserve comes in), but to be reserved
towards the generality of men.

[Sidenote: II25a] And to be unable to live with reference to any other
but a friend; because doing so is servile, as may be seen in that all
flatterers are low and men in low estate are flatterers. Neither is his
admiration easily excited, because nothing is great in his eyes; nor
does he bear malice, since remembering anything, and specially wrongs,
is no part of Great-mindedness, but rather overlooking them; nor does he
talk of other men; in fact, he will not speak either of himself or of
any other; he neither cares to be praised himself nor to have others
blamed; nor again does he praise freely, and for this reason he is
not apt to speak ill even of his enemies except to show contempt and
insolence.

And he is by no means apt to make laments about things which cannot be
helped, or requests about those which are trivial; because to be thus
disposed with respect to these things is consequent only upon real
anxiety about them. Again, he is the kind of man to acquire what
is beautiful and unproductive rather than what is productive and
profitable: this being rather the part of an independent man. Also slow
motion, deep-toned voice, and deliberate style of speech, are thought to
be characteristic of the Great-minded man: for he who is earnest about
few things is not likely to be in a hurry, nor he who esteems nothing
great to be very intent: and sharp tones and quickness are the result of
these.

This then is my idea of the Great-minded man; and he who is in the
defect is a Small-minded man, he who is in the excess a Vain man.
However, as we observed in respect of the last character we discussed,
these extremes are not thought to be vicious exactly, but only mistaken,
for they do no harm.

The Small-minded man, for instance, being really worthy of good deprives
himself of his deserts, and seems to have somewhat faulty from not
having a sufficiently high estimate of his own desert, in fact from
self-ignorance: because, but for this, he would have grasped after what
he really is entitled to, and that is good. Still such characters are
not thought to be foolish, but rather laggards. But the having such
an opinion of themselves seems to have a deteriorating effect on the
character: because in all cases men's aims are regulated by their
supposed desert, and thus these men, under a notion of their own want of
desert, stand aloof from honourable actions and courses, and similarly
from external goods.

But the Vain are foolish and self-ignorant, and that palpably: because
they attempt honourable things, as though they were worthy, and then
they are detected. They also set themselves off, by dress, and carriage,
and such-like things, and desire that their good circumstances may
be seen, and they talk of them under the notion of receiving
honour thereby. Small-mindedness rather than Vanity is opposed to
Great-mindedness, because it is more commonly met with and is worse.

[Sidenote:1125b] Well, the virtue of Great-mindedness has for its object
great Honour, as we have said: and there seems to be a virtue having
Honour also for its object (as we stated in the former book), which may
seem to bear to Great-mindedness the same relation that Liberality does
to Magnificence: that is, both these virtues stand aloof from what is
great but dispose us as we ought to be disposed towards moderate and
small matters. Further: as in giving and receiving of wealth there is
a mean state, an excess, and a defect, so likewise in grasping after
Honour there is the more or less than is right, and also the doing so
from right sources and in right manner.

For we blame the lover of Honour as aiming at Honour more than he ought,
and from wrong sources; and him who is destitute of a love of Honour as
not choosing to be honoured even for what is noble. Sometimes again we
praise the lover of Honour as manly and having a love for what is noble,
and him who has no love for it as being moderate and modest (as we
noticed also in the former discussion of these virtues).

It is clear then that since "Lover of so and so" is a term capable of
several meanings, we do not always denote the same quality by the term
"Lover of Honour;" but when we use it as a term of commendation we
denote more than the mass of men are; when for blame more than a man
should be.

And the mean state having no proper name the extremes seem to dispute
for it as unoccupied ground: but of course where there is excess and
defect there must be also the mean. And in point of fact, men do grasp
at Honour more than they should, and less, and sometimes just as they
ought; for instance, this state is praised, being a mean state in regard
of Honour, but without any appropriate name. Compared with what is
called Ambition it shows like a want of love for Honour, and compared
with this it shows like Ambition, or compared with both, like both
faults: nor is this a singular case among the virtues. Here the
extreme characters appear to be opposed, because the mean has no name
appropriated to it.


V

Meekness is a mean state, having for its object-matter Anger: and as the
character in the mean has no name, and we may almost say the same of the
extremes, we give the name of Meekness (leaning rather to the defect,
which has no name either) to the character in the mean.

The excess may be called an over-aptness to Anger: for the passion is
Anger, and the producing causes many and various. Now he who is angry at
what and with whom he ought, and further, in right manner and time, and
for proper length of time, is praised, so this Man will be Meek since
Meekness is praised. For the notion represented by the term Meek man is
the being imperturbable, and not being led away by passion, but being
angry in that manner, and at those things, and for that length of time,
which Reason may direct. This character however is thought to err rather
on [Sidenote:1126a] the side of defect, inasmuch as he is not apt to
take revenge but rather to make allowances and forgive. And the defect,
call it Angerlessness or what you will, is blamed: I mean, they who are
not angry at things at which they ought to be angry are thought to be
foolish, and they who are angry not in right manner, nor in right time,
nor with those with whom they ought; for a man who labours under this
defect is thought to have no perception, nor to be pained, and to have
no tendency to avenge himself, inasmuch as he feels no anger: now to
bear with scurrility in one's own person, and patiently see one's own
friends suffer it, is a slavish thing.

As for the excess, it occurs in all forms; men are angry with those with
whom, and at things with which, they ought not to be, and more than they
ought, and too hastily, and for too great a length of time. I do not
mean, however, that these are combined in any one person: that would
in fact be impossible, because the evil destroys itself, and if it is
developed in its full force it becomes unbearable.

Now those whom we term the Passionate are soon angry, and with people
with whom and at things at which they ought not, and in an excessive
degree, but they soon cool again, which is the best point about them.
And this results from their not repressing their anger, but repaying
their enemies (in that they show their feeings by reason of their
vehemence), and then they have done with it.

The Choleric again are excessively vehement, and are angry at
everything, and on every occasion; whence comes their Greek name
signifying that their choler lies high.

The Bitter-tempered are hard to reconcile and keep their anger for
a long while, because they repress the feeling: but when they have
revenged themselves then comes a lull; for the vengeance destroys their
anger by producing pleasure in lieu of pain. But if this does not happen
they keep the weight on their minds: because, as it does not show
itself, no one attempts to reason it away, and digesting anger within
one's self takes time. Such men are very great nuisances to themselves
and to their best friends.

Again, we call those Cross-grained who are angry at wrong objects, and
in excessive degree, and for too long a time, and who are not appeased
without vengeance or at least punishing the offender.

To Meekness we oppose the excess rather than the defect, because it is
of more common occurrence: for human nature is more disposed to take
than to forgo revenge. And the Cross-grained are worse to live with
[than they who are too phlegmatic].

Now, from what has been here said, that is also plain which was said
before. I mean, it is no easy matter to define how, and with what
persons, and at what kind of things, and how long one ought to be
angry, and up to what point a person is right or is wrong. For he that
transgresses the strict rule only a little, whether on the side of
too much or too little, is not blamed: sometimes we praise those who
[Sidenote:1126b] are deficient in the feeling and call them Meek,
sometimes we call the irritable Spirited as being well qualified for
government. So it is not easy to lay down, in so many words, for what
degree or kind of transgression a man is blameable: because the decision
is in particulars, and rests therefore with the Moral Sense. Thus much,
however, is plain, that the mean state is praiseworthy, in virtue of
which we are angry with those with whom, and at those things with which,
we ought to be angry, and in right manner, and so on; while the excesses
and defects are blameable, slightly so if only slight, more so if
greater, and when considerable very blameable.

It is clear, therefore, that the mean state is what we are to hold to.

This then is to be taken as our account of the various moral states
which have Anger for their object-matter.

VI

Next, as regards social intercourse and interchange of words and acts,
some men are thought to be Over-Complaisant who, with a view solely to
giving pleasure, agree to everything and never oppose, but think their
line is to give no pain to those they are thrown amongst: they, on
the other hand, are called Cross and Contentious who take exactly the
contrary line to these, and oppose in everything, and have no care at
all whether they give pain or not.

Now it is quite clear of course, that the states I have named are
blameable, and that the mean between them is praiseworthy, in virtue
of which a man will let pass what he ought as he ought, and also will
object in like manner. However, this state has no name appropriated, but
it is most like Friendship; since the man who exhibits it is just the
kind of man whom we would call the amiable friend, with the addition of
strong earnest affection; but then this is the very point in which it
differs from Friendship, that it is quite independent of any feeling or
strong affection for those among whom the man mixes: I mean, that he
takes everything as he ought, not from any feeling of love or hatred,
but simply because his natural disposition leads him to do so; he will
do it alike to those whom he does know and those whom he does not, and
those with whom he is intimate and those with whom he is not; only in
each case as propriety requires, because it is not fitting to care
alike for intimates and strangers, nor again to pain them alike.

It has been stated in a general way that his social intercourse will be
regulated by propriety, and his aim will be to avoid giving pain and to
contribute to pleasure, but with a constant reference to what is noble
and expedient.

His proper object-matter seems to be the pleasures and pains which arise
out of social intercourse, but whenever it is not honourable or even
hurtful to him to contribute to pleasure, in these instances he will run
counter and prefer to give pain.

Or if the things in question involve unseemliness to the doer, and this
not inconsiderable, or any harm, whereas his opposition will cause some
little pain, here he will not agree but will run counter.

[Sidenote:1127a] Again, he will regulate differently his intercourse
with great men and with ordinary men, and with all people according to
the knowledge he has of them; and in like manner, taking in any other
differences which may exist, giving to each his due, and in itself
preferring to give pleasure and cautious not to give pain, but still
guided by the results, I mean by what is noble and expedient according
as they preponderate.

Again, he will inflict trifling pain with a view to consequent pleasure.

Well, the man bearing the mean character is pretty well such as I have
described him, but he has no name appropriated to him: of those who try
to give pleasure, the man who simply and disinterestedly tries to be
agreeable is called Over-Complaisant, he who does it with a view to
secure some profit in the way of wealth, or those things which wealth
may procure, is a Flatterer: I have said before, that the man who is
"always non-content" is Cross and Contentious. Here the extremes have
the appearance of being opposed to one another, because the mean has no
appropriate name.



VII

The mean state which steers clear of Exaggeration has pretty much the
same object-matter as the last we described, and likewise has no name
appropriated to it. Still it may be as well to go over these states:
because, in the first place, by a particular discussion of each we shall
be better acquainted with the general subject of moral character, and
next we shall be the more convinced that the virtues are mean states by
seeing that this is universally the case.

In respect then of living in society, those who carry on this
intercourse with a view to pleasure and pain have been already spoken
of; we will now go on to speak of those who are True or False, alike in
their words and deeds and in the claims which they advance.

Now the Exaggerator is thought to have a tendency to lay claim to things
reflecting credit on him, both when they do not belong to him at all and
also in greater degree than that in which they really do: whereas the
Reserved man, on the contrary, denies those which really belong to
him or else depreciates them, while the mean character being a
Plain-matter-of-fact person is Truthful in life and word, admitting
the existence of what does really belong to him and making it neither
greater nor less than the truth.

It is possible of course to take any of these lines either with or
without some further view: but in general men speak, and act, and live,
each according to his particular character and disposition, unless
indeed a man is acting from any special motive.

Now since falsehood is in itself low and blameable, while truth is noble
and praiseworthy, it follows that the Truthful man (who is also in the
mean) is praiseworthy, and the two who depart from strict truth are both
blameable, but especially the Exaggerator.

We will now speak of each, and first of the Truthful man: I call him
Truthful, because we are not now meaning the man who is true in his
agreements nor in such matters as amount to justice or injustice (this
would come within the [Sidenote:1127b] province of a different virtue),
but, in such as do not involve any such serious difference as this, the
man we are describing is true in life and word simply because he is in a
certain moral state.

And he that is such must be judged to be a good man: for he that has a
love for Truth as such, and is guided by it in matters indifferent, will
be so likewise even more in such as are not indifferent; for surely he
will have a dread of falsehood as base, since he shunned it even in
itself: and he that is of such a character is praiseworthy, yet he leans
rather to that which is below the truth, this having an appearance of
being in better taste because exaggerations are so annoying.

As for the man who lays claim to things above what really belongs to him
_without_ any special motive, he is like a base man because he would
not otherwise have taken pleasure in falsehood, but he shows as a fool
rather than as a knave. But if a man does this _with_ a special motive,
suppose for honour or glory, as the Braggart does, then he is not
so very blameworthy, but if, directly or indirectly, for pecuniary
considerations, he is more unseemly.

Now the Braggart is such not by his power but by his purpose, that is to
say, in virtue of his moral state, and because he is a man of a certain
kind; just as there are liars who take pleasure in falsehood for its
own sake while others lie from a desire of glory or gain. They who
exaggerate with a view to glory pretend to such qualities as are
followed by praise or highest congratulation; they who do it with a view
to gain assume those which their neighbours can avail themselves of,
and the absence of which can be concealed, as a man's being a skilful
soothsayer or physician; and accordingly most men pretend to such things
and exaggerate in this direction, because the faults I have mentioned
are in them.

The Reserved, who depreciate their own qualities, have the appearance of
being more refined in their characters, because they are not thought to
speak with a view to gain but to avoid grandeur: one very common trait
in such characters is their denying common current opinions, as Socrates
used to do. There are people who lay claim falsely to small things and
things the falsity of their pretensions to which is obvious; these are
called Factotums and are very despicable.

This very Reserve sometimes shows like Exaggeration; take, for instance,
the excessive plainness of dress affected by the Lacedaemonians: in
fact, both excess and the extreme of deficiency partake of the nature of
Exaggeration. But they who practise Reserve in moderation, and in cases
in which the truth is not very obvious and plain, give an impression of
refinement. Here it is the Exaggerator (as being the worst character)
who appears to be opposed to the Truthful Man.

VIII

[Sidenote:II28a] Next, as life has its pauses and in them admits of
pastime combined with Jocularity, it is thought that in this respect
also there is a kind of fitting intercourse, and that rules may be
prescribed as to the kind of things one should say and the manner of
saying them; and in respect of hearing likewise (and there will be a
difference between the saying and hearing such and such things). It is
plain that in regard to these things also there will be an excess and
defect and a mean.

Now they who exceed in the ridiculous are judged to be Buffoons and
Vulgar, catching at it in any and every way and at any cost, and aiming
rather at raising laughter than at saying what is seemly and at avoiding
to pain the object of their wit. They, on the other hand, who would not
for the world make a joke themselves and are displeased with such as do
are thought to be Clownish and Stern. But they who are Jocular in good
taste are denominated by a Greek term expressing properly ease of
movement, because such are thought to be, as one may say, motions of the
moral character; and as bodies are judged of by their motions so too are
moral characters.

Now as the ridiculous lies on the surface, and the majority of men take
more pleasure than they ought in Jocularity and Jesting, the Buffoons
too get this name of Easy Pleasantry, as if refined and gentlemanlike;
but that they differ from these, and considerably too, is plain from
what has been said.

One quality which belongs to the mean state is Tact: it is
characteristic of a man of Tact to say and listen to such things as are
fit for a good man and a gentleman to say and listen to: for there are
things which are becoming for such a one to say and listen to in the way
of Jocularity, and there is a difference between the Jocularity of the
Gentleman and that of the Vulgarian; and again, between that of the
educated and uneducated man. This you may see from a comparison of the
Old and New Comedy: in the former obscene talk made the fun; in the
latter it is rather innuendo: and this is no slight difference _as
regards decency_.

Well then, are we to characterise him who jests well by his saying what
is becoming a gentleman, or by his avoiding to pain the object of his
wit, or even by his giving him pleasure? or will not such a definition
be vague, since different things are hateful and pleasant to different
men?

Be this as it may, whatever he says such things will he also listen to,
since it is commonly held that a man will do what he will bear to hear:
this must, however, be limited; a man will not do quite all that he will
hear: because jesting is a species of scurrility and there are some
points of scurrility forbidden by law; it may be certain points of
jesting should have been also so forbidden. So then the refined and
gentlemanlike man will bear himself thus as being a law to himself. Such
is the mean character, whether denominated the man of Tact or of Easy
Pleasantry.

But the Buffoon cannot resist the ridiculous, sparing neither himself
nor any one else so that he can but raise his laugh, saying things of
such kind as no man of refinement would say and some which he would not
even tolerate if said by others in his hearing. [Sidenote:1128b] The
Clownish man is for such intercourse wholly useless: inasmuch as
contributing nothing jocose of his own he is savage with all who do.

Yet some pause and amusement in life are generally judged to be
indispensable.

The three mean states which have been described do occur in life, and
the object-matter of all is interchange of words and deeds. They differ,
in that one of them is concerned with truth, and the other two with the
pleasurable: and of these two again, the one is conversant with
the jocosities of life, the other with all other points of social
intercourse.

IX

To speak of Shame as a Virtue is incorrect, because it is much more like
a feeling than a moral state. It is defined, we know, to be "a kind of
fear of disgrace," and its effects are similar to those of the fear of
danger, for they who feel Shame grow red and they who fear death turn
pale. So both are evidently in a way physical, which is thought to be a
mark of a feeling rather than a moral state.

Moreover, it is a feeling not suitable to every age, but only to youth:
we do think that the young should be Shamefaced, because since they live
at the beck and call of passion they do much that is wrong and Shame
acts on them as a check. In fact, we praise such young men as are
Shamefaced, but no one would ever praise an old man for being given
to it, inasmuch as we hold that he ought not to do things which cause
Shame; for Shame, since it arises at low bad actions, does not at all
belong to the good man, because such ought not to be done at all: nor
does it make any difference to allege that some things are disgraceful
really, others only because they are thought so; for neither should be
done, so that a man ought not to be in the position of feeling Shame. In
truth, to be such a man as to do anything disgraceful is the part of a
faulty character. And for a man to be such that he would feel Shame if
he should do anything disgraceful, and to think that this constitutes
him a good man, is absurd: because Shame is felt at voluntary actions
only, and a good man will never voluntarily do what is base.

True it is, that Shame may be good on a certain supposition, as "if a
man should do such things, he would feel Shame:" but then the Virtues
are good in themselves, and not merely in supposed cases. And, granted
that impudence and the not being ashamed to do what is disgraceful is
base, it does not the more follow that it is good for a man to do such
things and feel Shame.

Nor is Self-Control properly a Virtue, but a kind of mixed state:
however, all about this shall be set forth in a future Book.




BOOK V

[Sidenote:1129a] Now the points for our inquiry in respect of Justice
and Injustice are, what kind of actions are their object-matter, and
what kind of a mean state Justice is, and between what points the
abstract principle of it, i.e. the Just, is a mean. And our inquiry
shall be, if you please, conducted in the same method as we have
observed in the foregoing parts of this treatise.

We see then that all men mean by the term Justice a moral state such
that in consequence of it men have the capacity of doing what is
just, and actually do it, and wish it: similarly also with respect to
Injustice, a moral state such that in consequence of it men do unjustly
and wish what is unjust: let us also be content then with these as a
ground-work sketched out.

I mention the two, because the same does not hold with regard to States
whether of mind or body as with regard to Sciences or Faculties: I mean
that whereas it is thought that the same Faculty or Science embraces
contraries, a State will not: from health, for instance, not the
contrary acts are done but the healthy ones only; we say a man walks
healthily when he walks as the healthy man would.

However, of the two contrary states the one may be frequently known from
the other, and oftentimes the states from their subject-matter: if it be
seen clearly what a good state of body is, then is it also seen what a
bad state is, and from the things which belong to a good state of body
the good state itself is seen, and _vice versa_. If, for instance,
the good state is firmness of flesh it follows that the bad state is
flabbiness of flesh; and whatever causes firmness of flesh is connected
with the good state. It follows moreover in general, that if of two
contrary terms the one is used in many senses so also will the other be;
as, for instance, if "the Just," then also "the Unjust." Now Justice and
Injustice do seem to be used respectively in many senses, but, because
the line of demarcation between these is very fine and minute, it
commonly escapes notice that they are thus used, and it is not plain
and manifest as where the various significations of terms are widely
different for in these last the visible difference is great, for
instance, the word [Greek: klehis] is used equivocally to denote the
bone which is under the neck of animals and the instrument with which
people close doors.

Let it be ascertained then in how many senses the term "Unjust man" is
used. Well, he who violates the law, and he who is a grasping man, and
the unequal man, are all thought to be Unjust and so manifestly the Just
man will be, the man who acts according to law, and the equal man "The
Just" then will be the lawful and the equal, and "the Unjust" the
unlawful and the unequal.

[Sidenote:1129b] Well, since the Unjust man is also a grasping man, he
will be so, of course, with respect to good things, but not of every
kind, only those which are the subject-matter of good and bad fortune
and which are in themselves always good but not always to the
individual. Yet men pray for and pursue these things: this they should
not do but pray that things which are in the abstract good may be so
also to them, and choose what is good for themselves.

But the Unjust man does not always choose actually the greater part, but
even sometimes the less; as in the case of things which are simply evil:
still, since the less evil is thought to be in a manner a good and the
grasping is after good, therefore even in this case he is thought to be
a grasping man, i.e. one who strives for more good than fairly falls to
his share: of course he is also an unequal man, this being an inclusive
and common term.

We said that the violator of Law is Unjust, and the keeper of the Law
Just: further, it is plain that all Lawful things are in a manner
Just, because by Lawful we understand what have been defined by the
legislative power and each of these we say is Just. The Laws too give
directions on all points, aiming either at the common good of all, or
that of the best, or that of those in power (taking for the standard
real goodness or adopting some other estimate); in one way we mean by
Just, those things which are apt to produce and preserve happiness and
its ingredients for the social community.

Further, the Law commands the doing the deeds not only of the brave man
(as not leaving the ranks, nor flying, nor throwing away one's arms),
but those also of the perfectly self-mastering man, as abstinence from
adultery and wantonness; and those of the meek man, as refraining from
striking others or using abusive language: and in like manner in respect
of the other virtues and vices commanding some things and forbidding
others, rightly if it is a good law, in a way somewhat inferior if it is
one extemporised.

Now this Justice is in fact perfect Virtue, yet not simply so but as
exercised towards one's neighbour: and for this reason Justice is
thought oftentimes to be the best of the Virtues, and

  "neither Hesper nor the Morning-star
  So worthy of our admiration:"

and in a proverbial saying we express the same;

  "All virtue is in Justice comprehended."

And it is in a special sense perfect Virtue because it is the practice
of perfect Virtue. And perfect it is because he that has it is able to
practise his virtue towards his neighbour and not merely on himself; I
mean, there are many who can practise virtue in the regulation of their
own personal conduct who are wholly unable to do it in transactions with
[Sidenote:1130a] their neighbour. And for this reason that saying of
Bias is thought to be a good one,

  "Rule will show what a man is;"

for he who bears Rule is necessarily in contact with others, i.e. in a
community. And for this same reason Justice alone of all the Virtues is
thought to be a good to others, because it has immediate relation to
some other person, inasmuch as the Just man does what is advantageous to
another, either to his ruler or fellow-subject. Now he is the basest
of men who practises vice not only in his own person but towards his
friends also; but he the best who practises virtue not merely in his
own person but towards his neighbour, for this is a matter of some
difficulty.

However, Justice in this sense is not a part of Virtue but is
co-extensive with Virtue; nor is the Injustice which answers to it a
part of Vice but co-extensive with Vice. Now wherein Justice in this
sense differs from Virtue appears from what has been said: it is the
same really, but the point of view is not the same: in so far as it has
respect to one's neighbour it is Justice, in so far as it is such and
such a moral state it is simply Virtue.

II

But the object of our inquiry is Justice, in the sense in which it is
a part of Virtue (for there is such a thing, as we commonly say), and
likewise with respect to particular Injustice. And of the existence of
this last the following consideration is a proof: there are many vices
by practising which a man acts unjustly, of course, but does not grasp
at more than his share of good; if, for instance, by reason of cowardice
he throws away his shield, or by reason of ill-temper he uses abusive
language, or by reason of stinginess does not give a friend pecuniary
assistance; but whenever he does a grasping action, it is often in the
way of none of these vices, certainly not in all of them, still in
the way of some vice or other (for we blame him), and in the way of
Injustice. There is then some kind of Injustice distinct from that
co-extensive with Vice and related to it as a part to a whole, and some
"Unjust" related to that which is co-extensive with violation of the law
as a part to a whole.

Again, suppose one man seduces a man's wife with a view to gain and
actually gets some advantage by it, and another does the same from
impulse of lust, at an expense of money and damage; this latter will be
thought to be rather destitute of self-mastery than a grasping man, and
the former Unjust but not destitute of self-mastery: now why? plainly
because of his gaining.

Again, all other acts of Injustice we refer to some particular
depravity, as, if a man commits adultery, to abandonment to his
passions; if he deserts his comrade, to cowardice; if he strikes
another, to anger: but if he gains by the act to no other vice than to
Injustice.

[Sidenote:1131b] Thus it is clear that there is a kind of Injustice
different from and besides that which includes all Vice, having the same
name because the definition is in the same genus; for both have their
force in dealings with others, but the one acts upon honour, or wealth,
or safety, or by whatever one name we can include all these things, and
is actuated by pleasure attendant on gain, while the other acts upon all
things which constitute the sphere of the good man's action.

Now that there is more than one kind of Justice, and that there is one
which is distinct from and besides that which is co-extensive with,
Virtue, is plain: we must next ascertain what it is, and what are its
characteristics.

Well, the Unjust has been divided into the unlawful and the unequal, and
the Just accordingly into the lawful and the equal: the aforementioned
Injustice is in the way of the unlawful. And as the unequal and the more
are not the same, but differing as part to whole (because all more is
unequal, but not all unequal more), so the Unjust and the Injustice we
are now in search of are not the same with, but other than, those before
mentioned, the one being the parts, the other the wholes; for this
particular Injustice is a part of the Injustice co-extensive with Vice,
and likewise this Justice of the Justice co-extensive with Virtue.
So that what we have now to speak of is the particular Justice and
Injustice, and likewise the particular Just and Unjust.

Here then let us dismiss any further consideration of the Justice
ranking as co-extensive with Virtue (being the practice of Virtue in all
its bearings towards others), and of the co-relative Injustice (being
similarly the practice of Vice). It is clear too, that we must separate
off the Just and the Unjust involved in these: because one may pretty
well say that most lawful things are those which naturally result in
action from Virtue in its fullest sense, because the law enjoins the
living in accordance with each Virtue and forbids living in accordance
with each Vice. And the producing causes of Virtue in all its bearings
are those enactments which have been made respecting education for
society.

By the way, as to individual education, in respect of which a man is
simply good without reference to others, whether it is the province of
[Greek: politikhae] or some other science we must determine at a
future time: for it may be it is not the same thing to be a good man and
a good citizen in every case.

Now of the Particular Justice, and the Just involved in it, one species
is that which is concerned in the distributions of honour, or wealth, or
such other things as are to be shared among the members of the social
community (because in these one man as compared with another may have
either an equal or an unequal share), and the other is that which is
Corrective in the various transactions between man and man.

[Sidenote: 1131a] And of this latter there are two parts: because of
transactions some are voluntary and some involuntary; voluntary, such as
follow; selling, buying, use, bail, borrowing, deposit, hiring: and this
class is called voluntary because the origination of these transactions
is voluntary.

The involuntary again are either such as effect secrecy; as theft,
adultery, poisoning, pimping, kidnapping of slaves, assassination, false
witness; or accompanied with open violence; as insult, bonds, death,
plundering, maiming, foul language, slanderous abuse.

III

Well, the unjust man we have said is unequal, and the abstract "Unjust"
unequal: further, it is plain that there is some mean of the unequal,
that is to say, the equal or exact half (because in whatever action
there is the greater and the less there is also the equal, i.e. the
exact half). If then the Unjust is unequal the Just is equal, which all
must allow without further proof: and as the equal is a mean the Just
must be also a mean. Now the equal implies two terms at least: it
follows then that the Just is both a mean and equal, and these to
certain persons; and, in so far as it is a mean, between certain things
(that is, the greater and the less), and, so far as it is equal, between
two, and in so far as it is just it is so to certain persons. The Just
then must imply four terms at least, for those to which it is just are
two, and the terms representing the things are two.

And there will be the same equality between the terms representing the
persons, as between those representing the things: because as the latter
are to one another so are the former: for if the persons are not equal
they must not have equal shares; in fact this is the very source of all
the quarrelling and wrangling in the world, when either they who are
equal have and get awarded to them things not equal, or being not equal
those things which are equal. Again, the necessity of this equality of
ratios is shown by the common phrase "according to rate," for all agree
that the Just in distributions ought to be according to some rate:
but what that rate is to be, all do not agree; the democrats are for
freedom, oligarchs for wealth, others for nobleness of birth, and the
aristocratic party for virtue.

The Just, then, is a certain proportionable thing. For proportion does
not apply merely to number in the abstract, but to number generally,
since it is equality of ratios, and implies four terms at least (that
this is the case in what may be called discrete proportion is plain and
obvious, but it is true also in continual proportion, for this uses the
one [Sidenote: 1131b] term as two, and mentions it twice; thus A:B:C may
be expressed A:B::B:C. In the first, B is named twice; and so, if, as
in the second, B is actually written twice, the proportionals will be
four): and the Just likewise implies four terms at the least, and the
ratio between the two pair of terms is the same, because the persons and
the things are divided similarly. It will stand then thus, A:B::C:D, and
then permutando A:C::B:D, and then (supposing C and D to represent the
things) A+C:B+D::A:B. The distribution in fact consisting in putting
together these terms thus: and if they are put together so as to
preserve this same ratio, the distribution puts them together justly. So
then the joining together of the first and third and second and fourth
proportionals is the Just in the distribution, and this Just is the
mean relatively to that which violates the proportionate, for
the proportionate is a mean and the Just is proportionate. Now
mathematicians call this kind of proportion geometrical: for in
geometrical proportion the whole is to the whole as each part to each
part. Furthermore this proportion is not continual, because the person
and thing do not make up one term.

The Just then is this proportionate, and the Unjust that which violates
the proportionate; and so there comes to be the greater and the less:
which in fact is the case in actual transactions, because he who acts
unjustly has the greater share and he who is treated unjustly has the
less of what is good: but in the case of what is bad this is reversed:
for the less evil compared with the greater comes to be reckoned for
good, because the less evil is more choiceworthy than the greater, and
what is choiceworthy is good, and the more so the greater good.

This then is the one species of the Just.

IV

And the remaining one is the Corrective, which arises in voluntary as
well as involuntary transactions. Now this just has a different form
from the aforementioned; for that which is concerned in distribution of
common property is always according to the aforementioned proportion: I
mean that, if the division is made out of common property, the
shares will bear the same proportion to one another as the original
contributions did: and the Unjust which is opposite to this Just is that
which violates the proportionate.

But the Just which arises in transactions between men is an equal in a
certain sense, and the Unjust an unequal, only not in the way of that
proportion but of arithmetical. [Sidenote: 1132a ] Because it makes no
difference whether a robbery, for instance, is committed by a good man
on a bad or by a bad man on a good, nor whether a good or a bad man has
committed adultery: the law looks only to the difference created by the
injury and treats the men as previously equal, where the one does and
the other suffers injury, or the one has done and the other suffered
harm. And so this Unjust, being unequal, the judge endeavours to reduce
to equality again, because really when the one party has been wounded
and the other has struck him, or the one kills and the other dies, the
suffering and the doing are divided into unequal shares; well, the judge
tries to restore equality by penalty, thereby taking from the gain.

For these terms gain and loss are applied to these cases, though perhaps
the term in some particular instance may not be strictly proper, as
gain, for instance, to the man who has given a blow, and loss to him who
has received it: still, when the suffering has been estimated, the one
is called loss and the other gain.

And so the equal is a mean between the more and the less, which
represent gain and loss in contrary ways (I mean, that the more of good
and the less of evil is gain, the less of good and the more of evil is
loss): between which the equal was stated to be a mean, which equal we
say is Just: and so the Corrective Just must be the mean between loss
and gain. And this is the reason why, upon a dispute arising, men have
recourse to the judge: going to the judge is in fact going to the Just,
for the judge is meant to be the personification of the Just. And men
seek a judge as one in the mean, which is expressed in a name given by
some to judges ([Greek: mesidioi], or middle-men) under the notion that
if they can hit on the mean they shall hit on the Just. The Just is then
surely a mean since the judge is also.

So it is the office of a judge to make things equal, and the line, as it
were, having been unequally divided, he takes from the greater part that
by which it exceeds the half, and adds this on to the less. And when the
whole is divided into two exactly equal portions then men say they have
their own, when they have gotten the equal; and the equal is a mean
between the greater and the less according to arithmetical equality.

This, by the way, accounts for the etymology of the term by which we
in Greek express the ideas of Just and Judge; ([Greek: dikaion] quasi
[Greek: dichaion], that is in two parts, and [Greek: dikastaes] quasi
[Greek: dichastaes], he who divides into two parts). For when from one
of two equal magnitudes somewhat has been taken and added to the other,
this latter exceeds the former by twice that portion: if it had been
merely taken from the former and not added to the latter, then the
latter would [Sidenote:1132b] have exceeded the former only by that one
portion; but in the other case, the greater exceeds the mean by one, and
the mean exceeds also by one that magnitude from which the portion was
taken. By this illustration, then, we obtain a rule to determine what
one ought to take from him who has the greater, and what to add to him
who has the less. The excess of the mean over the less must be added to
the less, and the excess of the greater over the mean be taken from the
greater.

Thus let there be three straight lines equal to one another. From one of
them cut off a portion, and add as much to another of them. The whole
line thus made will exceed the remainder of the first-named line, by
twice the portion added, and will exceed the untouched line by that
portion. And these terms loss and gain are derived from voluntary
exchange: that is to say, the having more than what was one's own is
called gaining, and the having less than one's original stock is called
losing; for instance, in buying or selling, or any other transactions
which are guaranteed by law: but when the result is neither more nor
less, but exactly the same as there was originally, people say they have
their own, and neither lose nor gain.

So then the Just we have been speaking of is a mean between loss and
gain arising in involuntary transactions; that is, it is the having the
same after the transaction as one had before it took place.

[Sidenote: V] There are people who have a notion that Reciprocation is
simply just, as the Pythagoreans said: for they defined the Just simply
and without qualification as "That which reciprocates with another." But
this simple Reciprocation will not fit on either to the Distributive
Just, or the Corrective (and yet this is the interpretation they put
on the Rhadamanthian rule of Just, If a man should suffer what he hath
done, then there would be straightforward justice"), for in many
cases differences arise: as, for instance, suppose one in authority
has struck a man, he is not to be struck in turn; or if a man has
struck one in authority, he must not only be struck but punished also.
And again, the voluntariness or involuntariness of actions makes a
great difference.

[Sidenote: II33_a_] But in dealings of exchange such a principle of
Justice as this Reciprocation forms the bond of union, but then it must
be Reciprocation according to proportion and not exact equality, because
by proportionate reciprocity of action the social community is held
together, For either Reciprocation of evil is meant, and if this be
not allowed it is thought to be a servile condition of things: or else
Reciprocation of good, and if this be not effected then there is no
admission to participation which is the very bond of their union.

And this is the moral of placing the Temple of the Graces ([Greek:
charites]) in the public streets; to impress the notion that there may
be requital, this being peculiar to [Greek: charis] because a man ought
to requite with a good turn the man who has done him a favour and then
to become himself the originator of another [Greek: charis], by doing
him a favour.

Now the acts of mutual giving in due proportion may be represented
by the diameters of a parallelogram, at the four angles of which the
parties and their wares are so placed that the side connecting the
parties be opposite to that connecting the wares, and each party be
connected by one side with his own ware, as in the accompanying diagram.

[Illustration: Builder_Shoemaker House_Shoes.]

The builder is to receive from the shoemaker of his ware, and to give
him of his own: if then there be first proportionate equality, and
_then_ the Reciprocation takes place, there will be the just result
which we are speaking of: if not, there is not the equal, nor will the
connection stand: for there is no reason why the ware of the one may not
be better than that of the other, and therefore before the exchange is
made they must have been equalised. And this is so also in the other
arts: for they would have been destroyed entirely if there were not a
correspondence in point of quantity and quality between the producer and
the consumer. For, we must remember, no dealing arises between two of
the same kind, two physicians, for instance; but say between a physician
and agriculturist, or, to state it generally, between those who are
different and not equal, but these of course must have been equalised
before the exchange can take place.

It is therefore indispensable that all things which can be exchanged
should be capable of comparison, and for this purpose money has come
in, and comes to be a kind of medium, for it measures all things and so
likewise the excess and defect; for instance, how many shoes are equal
to a house or a given quantity of food. As then the builder to the
shoemaker, so many shoes must be to the house (or food, if instead of a
builder an agriculturist be the exchanging party); for unless there is
this proportion there cannot be exchange or dealing, and this proportion
cannot be unless the terms are in some way equal; hence the need, as was
stated above, of some one measure of all things. Now this is really
and truly the Demand for them, which is the common bond of all such
dealings. For if the parties were not in want at all or not similarly of
one another's wares, there would either not be any exchange, or at least
not the same.

And money has come to be, by general agreement, a representative of
Demand: and the account of its Greek name [Greek: nomisma] is this, that
it is what it is not naturally but by custom or law ([Greek: nomos]),
and it rests with us to change its value, or make it wholly useless.

[Sidenote: 1113b] Very well then, there will be Reciprocation when
the terms have been equalised so as to stand in this proportion;
Agriculturist : Shoemaker : : wares of Shoemaker : wares of
Agriculturist; but you must bring them to this form of proportion when
they exchange, otherwise the one extreme will combine both exceedings of
the mean: but when they have exactly their own then they are equal and
have dealings, because the same equality can come to be in their case.
Let A represent an agriculturist, C food, B a shoemaker, D his wares
equalised with A's. Then the proportion will be correct, A:B::C:D; _now_
Reciprocation will be practicable, if it were not, there would have been
no dealing.

Now that what connects men in such transactions is Demand, as being some
one thing, is shown by the fact that, when either one does not want the
other or neither want one another, they do not exchange at all: whereas
they do when one wants what the other man has, wine for instance, giving
in return corn for exportation.

And further, money is a kind of security to us in respect of exchange
at some future time (supposing that one wants nothing now that we shall
have it when we do): the theory of money being that whenever one brings
it one can receive commodities in exchange: of course this too is liable
to depreciation, for its purchasing power is not always the same,
but still it is of a more permanent nature than the commodities it
represents. And this is the reason why all things should have a price
set upon them, because thus there may be exchange at any time, and if
exchange then dealing. So money, like a measure, making all things
commensurable equalises them: for if there was not exchange there would
not have been dealing, nor exchange if there were not equality, nor
equality if there were not the capacity of being commensurate: it
is impossible that things so greatly different should be really
commensurate, but we can approximate sufficiently for all practical
purposes in reference to Demand. The common measure must be some one
thing, and also from agreement (for which reason it is called [Greek:
nomisma]), for this makes all things commensurable: in fact, all things
are measured by money. Let B represent ten minæ, A a house worth five
minæ, or in other words half B, C a bed worth 1/10th of B: it is clear
then how many beds are equal to one house, namely, five.

It is obvious also that exchange was thus conducted before the existence
of money: for it makes no difference whether you give for a house five
beds or the price of five beds. We have now said then what the abstract
Just and Unjust are, and these having been defined it is plain that
just acting is a mean between acting unjustly and being acted unjustly
towards: the former being equivalent to having more, and the latter to
having less.

But Justice, it must be observed, is a mean state not after the same
manner as the forementioned virtues, but because it aims at producing
the mean, while Injustice occupies _both_ the extremes.

[Sidenote: 1134_a_] And Justice is the moral state in virtue of which
the just man is said to have the aptitude for practising the Just in
the way of moral choice, and for making division between _, himself and
another, or between two other men, not so as to give to himself the
greater and to his neighbour the less share of what is choiceworthy and
contrariwise of what is hurtful, but what is proportionably equal, and
in like manner when adjudging the rights of two other men.

Injustice is all this with respect to the Unjust: and since the Unjust
is excess or defect of what is good or hurtful respectively, in
violation of the proportionate, therefore Injustice is both excess and
defect because it aims at producing excess and defect; excess, that is,
in a man's own case of what is simply advantageous, and defect of what
is hurtful: and in the case of other men in like manner generally
speaking, only that the proportionate is violated not always in one
direction as before but whichever way it happens in the given case. And
of the Unjust act the less is being acted unjustly towards, and the
greater the acting unjustly towards others.

Let this way of describing the nature of Justice and Injustice, and
likewise the Just and the Unjust generally, be accepted as sufficient.

[Sidenote: VI] Again, since a man may do unjust acts and not yet have
formed a character of injustice, the question arises whether a man is
unjust in each particular form of injustice, say a thief, or adulterer,
or robber, by doing acts of a given character.

We may say, I think, that this will not of itself make any difference; a
man may, for instance, have had connection with another's wife, knowing
well with whom he was sinning, but he may have done it not of deliberate
choice but from the impulse of passion: of course he acts unjustly, but
he has not necessarily formed an unjust character: that is, he may have
stolen yet not be a thief; or committed an act of adultery but still not
be an adulterer, and so on in other cases which might be enumerated.

Of the relation which Reciprocation bears to the Just we have already
spoken: and here it should be noticed that the Just which we are
investigating is both the Just in the abstract and also as exhibited in
Social Relations, which latter arises in the case of those who live in
communion with a view to independence and who are free and equal either
proportionately or numerically.

It follows then that those who are not in this position have not among
themselves the Social Just, but still Just of some kind and resembling
that other. For Just implies mutually acknowledged law, and law the
possibility of injustice, for adjudication is the act of distinguishing
between the Just and the Unjust.

And among whomsoever there is the possibility of injustice among these
there is that of acting unjustly; but it does not hold conversely that
injustice attaches to all among whom there is the possibility of acting
unjustly, since by the former we mean giving one's self the larger share
of what is abstractedly good and the less of what is abstractedly evil.

[Sidenote: 134_b_] This, by the way, is the reason why we do not allow
a man to govern, but Principle, because a man governs for himself and
comes to be a despot: but the office of a ruler is to be guardian of the
Just and therefore of the Equal. Well then, since he seems to have no
peculiar personal advantage, supposing him a Just man, for in this case
he does not allot to himself the larger share of what is abstractedly
good unless it falls to his share proportionately (for which reason he
really governs for others, and so Justice, men say, is a good not to
one's self so much as to others, as was mentioned before), therefore
some compensation must be given him, as there actually is in the shape
of honour and privilege; and wherever these are not adequate there
rulers turn into despots.

But the Just which arises in the relations of Master and Father, is not
identical with, but similar to, these; because there is no possibility
of injustice towards those things which are absolutely one's own; and
a slave or child (so long as this last is of a certain age and not
separated into an independent being), is, as it were, part of a man's
self, and no man chooses to hurt himself, for which reason there cannot
be injustice towards one's own self: therefore neither is there the
social Unjust or Just, which was stated to be in accordance with law and
to exist between those among whom law naturally exists, and these were
said to be they to whom belongs equality of ruling and being ruled.

Hence also there is Just rather between a man and his wife than between
a man and his children or slaves; this is in fact the Just arising in
domestic relations: and this too is different from the Social Just.

[Sidenote: VII] Further, this last-mentioned Just is of two kinds,
natural and conventional; the former being that which has everywhere the
same force and does not depend upon being received or not; the latter
being that which originally may be this way or that indifferently but
not after enactment: for instance, the price of ransom being fixed at
a mina, or the sacrificing a goat instead of two sheep; and again, all
cases of special enactment, as the sacrificing to Brasidas as a hero; in
short, all matters of special decree.

But there are some men who think that all the Justs are of this latter
kind, and on this ground: whatever exists by nature, they say, is
unchangeable and has everywhere the same force; fire, for instance,
burns not here only but in Persia as well, but the Justs they see
changed in various places.

Now this is not really so, and yet it is in a way (though among the gods
perhaps by no means): still even amongst ourselves there is somewhat
existing by nature: allowing that everything is subject to change, still
there is that which does exist by nature, and that which does not.

Nay, we may go further, and say that it is practically plain what among
things which can be otherwise does exist by nature, and what does not
but is dependent upon enactment and conventional, even granting
that both are alike subject to be changed: and the same distinctive
illustration will apply to this and other cases; the right hand is
naturally the stronger, still some men may become equally strong in
both.

[Sidenote: 1135_a_] A parallel may be drawn between the Justs which
depend upon convention and expedience, and measures; for wine and corn
measures are not equal in all places, but where men buy they are large,
and where these same sell again they are smaller: well, in like manner
the Justs which are not natural, but of human invention, are not
everywhere the same, for not even the forms of government are, and yet
there is one only which by nature would be best in all places.

Now of Justs and Lawfuls each bears to the acts which embody and
exemplify it the relation of an universal to a particular; the acts
being many, but each of the principles only singular because each is an
universal. And so there is a difference between an unjust act and the
abstract Unjust, and the just act and the abstract Just: I mean, a thing
is unjust in itself, by nature or by ordinance; well, when this has been
embodied in act, there is an unjust act, but not till then, only
some unjust thing. And similarly of a just act. (Perhaps [Greek:
dikaiopragaema] is more correctly the common or generic term for just
act, the word [Greek: dikaioma], which I have here used, meaning
generally and properly the act corrective of the unjust act.) Now as
to each of them, what kinds there are, and how many, and what is their
object-matter, we must examine afterwards.

[Sidenote: VIII] For the present we proceed to say that, the Justs
and the Unjusts being what have been mentioned, a man is said to act
unjustly or justly when he embodies these abstracts in voluntary
actions, but when in involuntary, then he neither acts unjustly or
justly except accidentally; I mean that the being just or unjust is
really only accidental to the agents in such cases.

So both unjust and just actions are limited by the being voluntary or
the contrary: for when an embodying of the Unjust is voluntary, then
it is blamed and is at the same time also an unjust action: but, if
voluntariness does not attach, there will be a thing which is in itself
unjust but not yet an unjust action.

By voluntary, I mean, as we stated before, whatsoever of things in his
own power a man does with knowledge, and the absence of ignorance as to
the person to whom, or the instrument with which, or the result with
which he does; as, for instance, whom he strikes, what he strikes him
with, and with what probable result; and each of these points again, not
accidentally nor by compulsion; as supposing another man were to seize
his hand and strike a third person with it, here, of course, the owner
of the hand acts not voluntarily, because it did not rest with him to do
or leave undone: or again, it is conceivable that the person struck may
be his father, and he may know that it is a man, or even one of the
present company, whom he is striking, but not know that it is his
father. And let these same distinctions be supposed to be carried into
the case of the result and in fact the whole of any given action. In
fine then, that is involuntary which is done through ignorance, or
which, not resulting from ignorance, is not in the agent's control or is
done on compulsion.

I mention these cases, because there are many natural *[Sidenote:
1135_b_] things which we do and suffer knowingly but still no one of
which is either voluntary or involuntary, growing old, or dying, for
instance.

Again, accidentality may attach to the unjust in like manner as to the
just acts. For instance, a man may have restored what was deposited
with him, but against his will and from fear of the consequences of
a refusal: we must not say that he either does what is just, or does
justly, except accidentally: and in like manner the man who through
compulsion and against his will fails to restore a deposit, must be said
to do unjustly, or to do what is unjust, accidentally only.

Again, voluntary actions we do either from deliberate choice or without
it; from it, when we act from previous deliberation; without it, when
without any previous deliberation. Since then hurts which may be done in
transactions between man and man are threefold, those mistakes which are
attended with ignorance are, when a man either does a thing not to the
man to whom he meant to do it, or not the thing he meant to do, or not
with the instrument, or not with the result which he intended: either he
did not think he should hit him at all, or not with this, or this is not
the man he thought he should hit, or he did not think this would be
the result of the blow but a result has followed which he did not
anticipate; as, for instance, he did it not to wound but merely to prick
him; or it is not the man whom, or the way in which, he meant.

Now when the hurt has come about contrary to all reasonable expectation,
it is a Misadventure; when though not contrary to expectation yet
without any viciousness, it is a Mistake; for a man makes a mistake when
the origination of the cause rests with himself, he has a misadventure
when it is external to himself. When again he acts with knowledge, but
not from previous deliberation, it is an unjust action; for instance,
whatever happens to men from anger or other passions which are necessary
or natural: for when doing these hurts or making these mistakes they act
unjustly of course and their actions are unjust, still they are not yet
confirmed unjust or wicked persons by reason of these, because the hurt
did not arise from depravity in the doer of it: but when it does arise
from deliberate choice, then the doer is a confirmed unjust and depraved
man.

And on this principle acts done from anger are fairly judged not to be
from malice prepense, because it is not the man who acts in wrath who
is the originator really but he who caused his wrath. And again,
the question at issue in such cases is not respecting the fact but
respecting the justice of the case, the occasion of anger being a notion
of injury. I mean, that the parties do not dispute about the fact, as in
questions of contract (where one of the two must be a rogue, unless real
forgetfulness can be pleaded), but, admitting the fact, they dispute on
which side the justice of the case lies (the one who plotted against the
other, _i.e._ the real aggressor, of course, cannot be ignorant), so
that the one thinks there is injustice committed while the other does
not.

[Sidenote: 11364] Well then, a man acts unjustly if he has hurt another
of deliberate purpose, and he who commits such acts of injustice is
_ipso facto_ an unjust character when they are in violation of the
proportionate or the equal; and in like manner also a man is a just
character when he acts justly of deliberate purpose, and he does act
justly if he acts voluntarily.

Then as for involuntary acts of harm, they are either such as are
excusable or such as are not: under the former head come all errors done
not merely in ignorance but from ignorance; under the latter all that
are done not from ignorance but in ignorance caused by some passion
which is neither natural nor fairly attributable to human infirmity.

[Sidenote: IX] Now a question may be raised whether we have spoken with
sufficient distinctness as to being unjustly dealt with, and dealing
unjustly towards others. First, whether the case is possible which
Euripides has put, saying somewhat strangely,

  "My mother he hath slain;  the tale is short,
  Either he willingly did slay her willing,
  Or else with her will but against his own."

I mean then, is it really possible for a person to be unjustly dealt
with with his own consent, or must every case of being unjustly dealt
with be against the will of the sufferer as every act of unjust dealing
is voluntary?

And next, are cases of being unjustly dealt with to be ruled all one way
as every act of unjust dealing is voluntary? or may we say that some
cases are voluntary and some involuntary?

Similarly also as regards being justly dealt with: all just acting is
voluntary, so that it is fair to suppose that the being dealt with
unjustly or justly must be similarly opposed, as to being either
voluntary or involuntary.

Now as for being justly dealt with, the position that every case of this
is voluntary is a strange one, for some are certainly justly dealt
with without their will. The fact is a man may also fairly raise this
question, whether in every case he who has suffered what is unjust is
therefore unjustly dealt with, or rather that the case is the same with
suffering as it is with acting; namely that in both it is possible to
participate in what is just, but only accidentally. Clearly the case of
what is unjust is similar: for doing things in themselves unjust is not
identical with acting unjustly, nor is suffering them the same as being
unjustly dealt with. So too of acting justly and being justly dealt
with, since it is impossible to be unjustly dealt with unless some one
else acts unjustly or to be justly dealt with unless some one else acts
justly.

Now if acting unjustly is simply "hurting another voluntarily" (by which
I mean, knowing whom you are hurting, and wherewith, and how you are
hurting him), and the man who fails of self-control voluntarily hurts
himself, then this will be a case of being voluntarily dealt unjustly
with, and it will be possible for a man to deal unjustly with himself.
(This by the way is one of the questions raised, whether it is possible
for a man to deal unjustly with himself.) Or again, a man may, by
reason of failing of self-control, receive hurt from another man acting
voluntarily, and so here will be another case of being unjustly dealt
with voluntarily. [Sidenote: 1136]

The solution, I take it, is this: the definition of being unjustly dealt
with is not correct, but we must add, to the hurting with the knowledge
of the person hurt and the instrument and the manner of hurting him, the
fact of its being against the wish of the man who is hurt.

So then a man may be hurt and suffer what is in itself unjust
voluntarily, but unjustly dealt with voluntarily no man can be: since no
man wishes to be hurt, not even he who fails of self-control, who really
acts contrary to his wish: for no man wishes for that which he does not
_think_ to be good, and the man who fails of self-control does not what
he thinks he ought to do.

And again, he that gives away his own property (as Homer says Glaucus
gave to Diomed, "armour of gold for brass, armour worth a hundred oxen
for that which was worth but nine") is not unjustly dealt with, because
the giving rests entirely with himself; but being unjustly dealt with
does not, there must be some other person who is dealing unjustly
towards him.

With respect to being unjustly dealt with then, it is clear that it is
not voluntary.

There remain yet two points on which we purposed to speak: first, is he
chargeable with an unjust act who in distribution has _given_ the larger
share to one party contrary to the proper rate, or he that _has_ the
larger share? next, can a man deal unjustly by himself?

In the first question, if the first-named alternative is possible and
it is the distributor who acts unjustly and not he who has the larger
share, then supposing that a person knowingly and willingly gives more
to another than to himself here is a case of a man dealing unjustly by
himself; which, in fact, moderate men are thought to do, for it is a
characteristic of the equitable man to take less than his due.

Is not this the answer? that the case is not quite fairly stated,
because of some other good, such as credit or the abstract honourable,
in the supposed case the man did get the larger share. And again, the
difficulty is solved by reference to the definition of unjust dealing:
for the man suffers nothing contrary to his own wish, so that, on this
score at least, he is not unjustly dealt with, but, if anything, he is
hurt only.

It is evident also that it is the distributor who acts unjustly and not
the man who has the greater share: because the mere fact of the abstract
Unjust attaching to what a man does, does not constitute unjust action,
but the doing this voluntarily: and voluntariness attaches to that
quarter whence is the origination of the action, which clearly is in the
distributor not in the receiver. And again the term doing is used in
several senses; in one sense inanimate objects kill, or the hand, or
the slave by his master's bidding; so the man in question does not act
unjustly but does things which are in themselves unjust.

[Sidenote: 1137a] Again, suppose that a man has made a wrongful award
in ignorance; in the eye of the law he does not act unjustly nor is
his awarding unjust, but yet he is in a certain sense: for the Just
according to law and primary or natural Just are not coincident: but, if
he knowingly decided unjustly, then he himself as well as the receiver
got the larger share, that is, either of favour from the receiver or
private revenge against the other party: and so the man who decided
unjustly from these motives gets a larger share, in exactly the same
sense as a man would who received part of the actual matter of the
unjust action: because in this case the man who wrongly adjudged, say a
field, did not actually get land but money by his unjust decision.

Now men suppose that acting Unjustly rests entirely with themselves,
and conclude that acting Justly is therefore also easy. But this is not
really so; to have connection with a neighbour's wife, or strike one's
neighbour, or give the money with one's hand, is of course easy and
rests with one's self: but the doing these acts with certain inward
dispositions neither is easy nor rests entirely with one's self. And in
like way, the knowing what is Just and what Unjust men think no great
instance of wisdom because it is not hard to comprehend those things
of which the laws speak. They forget that these are not Just actions,
except accidentally: to be Just they must be done and distributed in
a certain manner: and this is a more difficult task than knowing what
things are wholesome; for in this branch of knowledge it is an easy
matter to know honey, wine, hellebore, cautery, or the use of the knife,
but the knowing how one should administer these with a view to health,
and to whom and at what time, amounts in fact to being a physician.

From this very same mistake they suppose also, that acting Unjustly is
equally in the power of the Just man, for the Just man no less, nay even
more, than the Unjust, may be able to do the particular acts; he may be
able to have intercourse with a woman or strike a man; or the brave man
to throw away his shield and turn his back and run this way or that.
True: but then it is not the mere doing these things which constitutes
acts of cowardice or injustice (except accidentally), but the doing them
with certain inward dispositions: just as it is not the mere using or
not using the knife, administering or not administering certain drugs,
which constitutes medical treatment or curing, but doing these things in
a certain particular way.

Again the abstract principles of Justice have their province among those
who partake of what is abstractedly good, and can have too much or too
little of these. Now there are beings who cannot have too much of them,
as perhaps the gods; there are others, again, to whom no particle of
them is of use, those who are incurably wicked to whom all things are
hurtful; others to whom they are useful to a certain degree: for this
reason then the province of Justice is among Men.

[Sidenote: 1137b] We have next to speak of Equity and the Equitable,
that is to say, of the relations of Equity to Justice and the Equitable
to the Just; for when we look into the matter the two do not appear
identical nor yet different in kind; and we sometimes commend the
Equitable and the man who embodies it in his actions, so that by way of
praise we commonly transfer the term also to other acts instead of the
term good, thus showing that the more Equitable a thing is the better it
is: at other times following a certain train of reasoning we arrive at a
difficulty, in that the Equitable though distinct from the Just is yet
praiseworthy; it seems to follow either that the Just is not good or the
Equitable not Just, since they are by hypothesis different; or if both
are good then they are identical.

This is a tolerably fair statement of the difficulty which on these
grounds arises in respect of the Equitable; but, in fact, all these may
be reconciled and really involve no contradiction: for the Equitable is
Just, being also better than one form of Just, but is not better than
the Just as though it were different from it in kind: Just and Equitable
then are identical, and, both being good, the Equitable is the better of
the two.

What causes the difficulty is this; the Equitable is Just, but not the
Just which is in accordance with written law, being in fact a correction
of that kind of Just. And the account of this is, that every law is
necessarily universal while there are some things which it is not
possible to speak of rightly in any universal or general statement.
Where then there is a necessity for general statement, while a general
statement cannot apply rightly to all cases, the law takes the
generality of cases, being fully aware of the error thus involved; and
rightly too notwithstanding, because the fault is not in the law, or
in the framer of the law, but is inherent in the nature of the thing,
because the matter of all action is necessarily such.

When then the law has spoken in general terms, and there arises a
case of exception to the general rule, it is proper, in so far as the
lawgiver omits the case and by reason of his universality of statement
is wrong, to set right the omission by ruling it as the lawgiver himself
would rule were he there present, and would have provided by law had he
foreseen the case would arise. And so the Equitable is Just but better
than one form of Just; I do not mean the abstract Just but the error
which arises out of the universality of statement: and this is the
nature of the Equitable, "a correction of Law, where Law is defective by
reason of its universality."

This is the reason why not all things are according to law, because
there are things about which it is simply impossible to lay down a law,
and so we want special enactments for particular cases. For to speak
generally, the rule of the undefined must be itself undefined also, just
as the rule to measure Lesbian building is made of lead: for this rule
shifts according to the form of each stone and the special enactment
according to the facts of the case in question.

[Sidenote: 1138a] It is clear then what the Equitable is; namely that it
is Just but better than one form of Just: and hence it appears too who
the Equitable man is: he is one who has a tendency to choose and carry
out these principles, and who is not apt to press the letter of the law
on the worse side but content to waive his strict claims though backed
by the law: and this moral state is Equity, being a species of Justice,
not a different moral state from Justice.

XI

The answer to the second of the two questions indicated above, "whether
it is possible for a man to deal unjustly by himself," is obvious from
what has been already stated. In the first place, one class of Justs is
those which are enforced by law in accordance with Virtue in the most
extensive sense of the term: for instance, the law does not bid a man
kill himself; and whatever it does not bid it forbids: well, whenever a
man does hurt contrary to the law (unless by way of requital of hurt),
voluntarily, i.e. knowing to whom he does it and wherewith, he acts
Unjustly. Now he that from rage kills himself, voluntarily, does this
in contravention of Right Reason, which the law does not permit. He
therefore acts Unjustly: but towards whom? towards the Community, not
towards himself (because he suffers with his own consent, and no man can
be Unjustly dealt with with his own consent), and on this principle the
Community punishes him; that is a certain infamy is attached to the
suicide as to one who acts Unjustly towards the Community.

Next, a man cannot deal Unjustly by himself in the sense in which a man
is Unjust who only does Unjust acts without being entirely bad (for the
two things are different, because the Unjust man is in a way bad, as the
coward is, not as though he were chargeable with badness in the full
extent of the term, and so he does not act Unjustly in this sense),
because if it were so then it would be possible for the same thing to
have been taken away from and added to the same person: but this is
really not possible, the Just and the Unjust always implying a plurality
of persons.

Again, an Unjust action must be voluntary, done of deliberate purpose,
and aggressive (for the man who hurts because he has first suffered and
is merely requiting the same is not thought to act Unjustly), but here
the man does to himself and suffers the same things at the same time.

Again, it would imply the possibility of being Unjustly dealt with with
one's own consent.

And, besides all this, a man cannot act Unjustly without his act falling
under some particular crime; now a man cannot seduce his own wife,
commit a burglary on his own premises, or steal his own property. After
all, the general answer to the question is to allege what was settled
respecting being Unjustly dealt with with one's own consent.

It is obvious, moreover, that being Unjustly dealt by and dealing
Unjustly by others are both wrong; because the one is having less, the
other having more, than the mean, and the case is parallel to that of
the healthy in the healing art, and that of good condition in the art of
training: but still the dealing Unjustly by others is the worst of the
two, because this involves wickedness and is blameworthy; wickedness, I
mean, either wholly, or nearly so (for not all voluntary wrong implies
injustice), but the being Unjustly dealt by does not involve wickedness
or injustice.

[Sidenote: 1138b] In itself then, the being Unjustly dealt by is the
least bad, but accidentally it may be the greater evil of the two.
However, scientific statement cannot take in such considerations; a
pleurisy, for instance, is called a greater physical evil than a bruise:
and yet this last may be the greater accidentally; it may chance that a
bruise received in a fall may cause one to be captured by the enemy and
slain.

Further: Just, in the way of metaphor and similitude, there may be I do
not say between a man and himself exactly but between certain parts of
his nature; but not Just of every kind, only such as belongs to the
relation of master and slave, or to that of the head of a family. For
all through this treatise the rational part of the Soul has been viewed
as distinct from the irrational.

Now, taking these into consideration, there is thought to be a
possibility of injustice towards one's self, because herein it is
possible for men to suffer somewhat in contradiction of impulses really
their own; and so it is thought that there is Just of a certain kind
between these parts mutually, as between ruler and ruled.

Let this then be accepted as an account of the distinctions which we
recognise respecting Justice and the rest of the moral virtues.




BOOK VI


I having stated in a former part of this treatise that men should choose
the mean instead of either the excess or defect, and that the mean
is according to the dictates of Right Reason; we will now proceed to
explain this term.

For in all the habits which we have expressly mentioned, as likewise
in all the others, there is, so to speak, a mark with his eye fixed on
which the man who has Reason tightens or slacks his rope; and there is a
certain limit of those mean states which we say are in accordance with
Right Reason, and lie between excess on the one hand and defect on the
other.

Now to speak thus is true enough but conveys no very definite meaning:
as, in fact, in all other pursuits requiring attention and diligence on
which skill and science are brought to bear; it is quite true of course
to say that men are neither to labour nor relax too much or too little,
but in moderation, and as Right Reason directs; yet if this were all
a man had he would not be greatly the wiser; as, for instance, if in
answer to the question, what are proper applications to the body, he
were to be told, "Oh! of course, whatever the science of medicine, and
in such manner as the physician, directs."

And so in respect of the mental states it is requisite not merely that
this should be true which has been already stated, but further that it
should be expressly laid down what Right Reason is, and what is the
definition of it.

[Sidenote: 1139a] Now in our division of the Excellences of the Soul, we
said there were two classes, the Moral and the Intellectual: the former
we have already gone through; and we will now proceed to speak of the
others, premising a few words respecting the Soul itself. It was
stated before, you will remember, that the Soul consists of two parts,
the Rational, and Irrational: we must now make a similar division of the
Rational.

Let it be understood then that there are two parts of the Soul possessed
of Reason; one whereby we realise those existences whose causes cannot
be otherwise than they are, and one whereby we realise those which can
be otherwise than they are (for there must be, answering to things
generically different, generically different parts of the soul naturally
adapted to each, since these parts of the soul possess their knowledge
in virtue of a certain resemblance and appropriateness in themselves to
the objects of which they are percipients); and let us name the
former, "that which is apt to know," the latter, "that which is apt to
calculate" (because deliberating and calculating are the same, and no
one ever deliberates about things which cannot be otherwise than they
are: and so the Calculative will be one part of the Rational faculty of
the soul).

We must discover, then, which is the best state of each of these,
because that will be the Excellence of each; and this again is relative
to the work each has to do.

II

There are in the Soul three functions on which depend moral action and
truth; Sense, Intellect, Appetition, whether vague Desire or definite
Will. Now of these Sense is the originating cause of no moral action, as
is seen from the fact that brutes have Sense but are in no way partakers
of moral action.

[Intellect and Will are thus connected,] what in the Intellectual
operation is Affirmation and Negation that in the Will is Pursuit and
Avoidance, And so, since Moral Virtue is a State apt to exercise Moral
Choice and Moral Choice is Will consequent on deliberation, the Reason
must be true and the Will right, to constitute good Moral Choice, and
what the Reason affirms the Will must pursue. Now this Intellectual
operation and this Truth is what bears upon Moral Action; of course
truth and falsehood than the conclusion such knowledge as he has will be
merely accidental.

IV

[Sidenote:1140a] Let thus much be accepted as a definition of Knowledge.
Matter which may exist otherwise than it actually does in any given case
(commonly called Contingent) is of two kinds, that which is the object
of Making, and that which is the object of Doing; now Making and Doing
are two different things (as we show in the exoteric treatise), and
so that state of mind, conjoined with Reason, which is apt to Do, is
distinct from that also conjoined with Reason, which is apt to Make: and
for this reason they are not included one by the other, that is, Doing
is not Making, nor Making Doing. Now as Architecture is an Art, and is
the same as "a certain state of mind, conjoined with Reason, which is
apt to Make," and as there is no Art which is not such a state, nor any
such state which is not an Art, Art, in its strict and proper sense,
must be "a state of mind, conjoined with true Reason, apt to Make."

Now all Art has to do with production, and contrivance, and seeing how
any of those things may be produced which may either be or not be, and
the origination of which rests with the maker and not with the thing
made.

And, so neither things which exist or come into being necessarily, nor
things in the way of nature, come under the province of Art, because
these are self-originating. And since Making and Doing are distinct, Art
must be concerned with the former and not the latter. And in a certain
sense Art and Fortune are concerned with the same things, as, Agathon
says by the way,

  "Art Fortune loves, and is of her beloved."

So Art, as has been stated, is "a certain state of mind, apt to Make,
conjoined with true Reason;" its absence, on the contrary, is the same
state conjoined with false Reason, and both are employed upon Contingent
matter.

V

As for Practical Wisdom, we shall ascertain its nature by examining to
what kind of persons we in common language ascribe it.

[Sidenote: 1140b] It is thought then to be the property of the
Practically Wise man to be able to deliberate well respecting what is
good and expedient for himself, not in any definite line, as what is
conducive to health or strength, but what to living well. A proof of
this is that we call men Wise in this or that, when they calculate well
with a view to some good end in a case where there is no definite
rule. And so, in a general way of speaking, the man who is good at
deliberation will be Practically Wise. Now no man deliberates respecting
things which cannot be otherwise than they are, nor such as lie not
within the range of his own action: and so, since Knowledge requires
strict demonstrative reasoning, of which Contingent matter does not
admit (I say Contingent matter, because all matters of deliberation must
be Contingent and deliberation cannot take place with respect to things
which are Necessarily), Practical Wisdom cannot be Knowledge nor Art;
nor the former, because what falls under the province of Doing must be
Contingent; not the latter, because Doing and Making are different in
kind.

It remains then that it must be "a state of mind true, conjoined with
Reason, and apt to Do, having for its object those things which are good
or bad for Man:" because of Making something beyond itself is always the
object, but cannot be of Doing because the very well-doing is in itself
an End.

For this reason we think Pericles and men of that stamp to be
Practically Wise, because they can see what is good for themselves and
for men in general, and we also think those to be such who are skilled
in domestic management or civil government. In fact, this is the reason
why we call the habit of perfected self-mastery by the name which in
Greek it bears, etymologically signifying "that which preserves the
Practical Wisdom:" for what it does preserve is the Notion I have
mentioned, _i.e._ of one's own true interest, For it is not every kind
of Notion which the pleasant and the painful corrupt and pervert, as,
for instance, that "the three angles of every rectilineal triangle are
equal to two right angles," but only those bearing on moral action.

For the Principles of the matters of moral action are the final cause
of them: now to the man who has been corrupted by reason of pleasure or
pain the Principle immediately becomes obscured, nor does he see that it
is his duty to choose and act in each instance with a view to this final
cause and by reason of it: for viciousness has a tendency to destroy the
moral Principle: and so Practical Wisdom must be "a state conjoined with
reason, true, having human good for its object, and apt to do."

Then again Art admits of degrees of excellence, but Practical Wisdom
does not: and in Art he who goes wrong purposely is preferable to him
who does so unwittingly, but not so in respect of Practical Wisdom or
the other Virtues. It plainly is then an Excellence of a certain kind,
and not an Art.

Now as there are two parts of the Soul which have Reason, it must be the
Excellence of the Opinionative [which we called before calculative or
deliberative], because both Opinion and Practical Wisdom are exercised
upon Contingent matter. And further, it is not simply a state conjoined
with Reason, as is proved by the fact that such a state may be forgotten
and so lost while Practical Wisdom cannot.

VI

Now Knowledge is a conception concerning universals and Necessary
matter, and there are of course certain First Principles in all trains
of demonstrative reasoning (that is of all Knowledge because this is
connected with reasoning): that faculty, then, which takes in the first
principles of that which comes under the range of Knowledge, cannot be
either Knowledge, or Art, or Practical Wisdom: not Knowledge, because
what is the object of Knowledge must be derived from demonstrative
reasoning; not either of the other two, because they are exercised upon
Contingent matter only. [Sidenote: 1141a] Nor can it be Science which
takes in these, because the Scientific Man must in some cases depend on
demonstrative Reasoning.

It comes then to this: since the faculties whereby we always attain
truth and are never deceived when dealing with matter Necessary or even
Contingent are Knowledge, Practical Wisdom, Science, and Intuition, and
the faculty which takes in First Principles cannot be any of the three
first; the last, namely Intuition, must be it which performs this
function.

VII

Science is a term we use principally in two meanings: in the first
place, in the Arts we ascribe it to those who carry their arts to the
highest accuracy; Phidias, for instance, we call a Scientific or cunning
sculptor; Polycleitus a Scientific or cunning statuary; meaning, in this
instance, nothing else by Science than an excellence of art: in the
other sense, we think some to be Scientific in a general way, not in any
particular line or in any particular thing, just as Homer says of a man
in his Margites; "Him the Gods made neither a digger of the ground, nor
ploughman, nor in any other way Scientific."

So it is plain that Science must mean the most accurate of all
Knowledge; but if so, then the Scientific man must not merely know the
deductions from the First Principles but be in possession of truth
respecting the First Principles. So that Science must be equivalent
to Intuition and Knowledge; it is, so to speak, Knowledge of the most
precious objects, _with a head on_.

I say of the most precious things, because it is absurd to suppose
[Greek: politikae], or Practical Wisdom, to be the highest, unless it
can be shown that Man is the most excellent of all that exists in the
Universe. Now if "healthy" and "good" are relative terms, differing
when applied to men or to fish, but "white" and "straight" are the same
always, men must allow that the Scientific is the same always, but the
Practically Wise varies: for whatever provides all things well for
itself, to this they would apply the term Practically Wise, and commit
these matters to it; which is the reason, by the way, that they call
some brutes Practically Wise, such that is as plainly have a faculty of
forethought respecting their own subsistence.

And it is quite plain that Science and [Greek: politikae] cannot be
identical: because if men give the name of Science to that faculty which
is employed upon what is expedient for themselves, there will be many
instead of one, because there is not one and the same faculty employed
on the good of all animals collectively, unless in the same sense as you
may say there is one art of healing with respect to all living beings.

[Sidenote: 1141b] If it is urged that man is superior to all other
animals, that makes no difference: for there are many other things more
Godlike in their nature than Man, as, most obviously, the elements of
which the Universe is composed.

It is plain then that Science is the union of Knowledge and Intuition,
and has for its objects those things which are most precious in their
nature. Accordingly, Anexagoras, Thales, and men of that stamp, people
call Scientific, but not Practically Wise because they see them ignorant
of what concerns themselves; and they say that what they know is quite
out of the common run certainly, and wonderful, and hard, and very fine
no doubt, but still useless because they do not seek after what is good
for them as men.

But Practical Wisdom is employed upon human matters, and such as are
objects of deliberation (for we say, that to deliberate well is most
peculiarly the work of the man who possesses this Wisdom), and no man
deliberates about things which cannot be otherwise than they are, nor
about any save those that have some definite End and this End good
resulting from Moral Action; and the man to whom we should give the name
of Good in Counsel, simply and without modification, is he who in the
way of calculation has a capacity for attaining that of practical goods
which is the best for Man. Nor again does Practical Wisdom consist in
a knowledge of general principles only, but it is necessary that one
should know also the particular details, because it is apt to act, and
action is concerned with details: for which reason sometimes men who
have not much knowledge are more practical than others who have; among
others, they who derive all they know from actual experience: suppose a
man to know, for instance, that light meats are easy of digestion and
wholesome, but not what kinds of meat are light, he will not produce a
healthy state; that man will have a much better chance of doing so,
who knows that the flesh of birds is light and wholesome. Since then
Practical Wisdom is apt to act, one ought to have both kinds of
knowledge, or, if only one, the knowledge of details rather than
of Principles. So there will be in respect of Practical Wisdom the
distinction of supreme and subordinate.

VIII

Further: [Greek: politikhae] and Practical Wisdom are the same mental
state, but the point of view is not the same.

Of Practical Wisdom exerted upon a community that which I would call
the Supreme is the faculty of Legislation; the subordinate, which is
concerned with the details, generally has the common name [Greek:
politikhae], and its functions are Action and Deliberation (for the
particular enactment is a matter of action, being the ultimate issue of
this branch of Practical Wisdom, and therefore people commonly say, that
these men alone are really engaged in government, because they alone
act, filling the same place relatively to legislators, that workmen do
to a master).

Again, that is thought to be Practical Wisdom in the most proper sense
which has for its object the interest of the Individual: and this
usually appropriates the common name: the others are called respectively
Domestic Management, Legislation, Executive Government divided into two
branches, Deliberative and Judicial. Now of course, knowledge for
one's self is one kind of knowledge, but it admits of many shades of
difference: and it is a common notion that the man [Sidenote:1142a] who
knows and busies himself about his own concerns merely is the man of
Practical Wisdom, while they who extend their solicitude to society at
large are considered meddlesome.

Euripides has thus embodied this sentiment; "How," says one of his
Characters, "How foolish am I, who whereas I might have shared equally,
idly numbered among the multitude of the army ... for them that are busy
and meddlesome [Jove hates]," because the generality of mankind seek
their own good and hold that this is their proper business. It is then
from this opinion that the notion has arisen that such men are the
Practically-Wise. And yet it is just possible that the good of the
individual cannot be secured independently of connection with a family
or a community. And again, how a man should manage his own affairs is
sometimes not quite plain, and must be made a matter of inquiry.

A corroboration of what I have said is the fact, that the young come to
be geometricians, and mathematicians, and Scientific in such matters,
but it is not thought that a young man can come to be possessed of
Practical Wisdom: now the reason is, that this Wisdom has for its object
particular facts, which come to be known from experience, which a young
man has not because it is produced only by length of time.

By the way, a person might also inquire why a boy may be made a
mathematician but not Scientific or a natural philosopher. Is not this
the reason? that mathematics are taken in by the process of abstraction,
but the principles of Science and natural philosophy must be gained by
experiment; and the latter young men talk of but do not realise, while
the nature of the former is plain and clear.

Again, in matter of practice, error attaches either to the general rule,
in the process of deliberation, or to the particular fact: for instance,
this would be a general rule, "All water of a certain gravity is bad;"
the particular fact, "this water is of that gravity."

And that Practical Wisdom is not knowledge is plain, for it has to do
with the ultimate issue, as has been said, because every object of
action is of this nature.

To Intuition it is opposed, for this takes in those principles which
cannot be proved by reasoning, while Practical Wisdom is concerned with
the ultimate particular fact which cannot be realised by Knowledge but
by Sense; I do not mean one of the five senses, but the same by which
we take in the mathematical fact, that no rectilineal figure can be
contained by less than three lines, i.e. that a triangle is the ultimate
figure, because here also is a stopping point.

This however is Sense rather than Practical Wisdom, which is of another
kind.

IX

Now the acts of inquiring and deliberating differ, though deliberating
is a kind of inquiring. We ought to ascertain about Good Counsel
likewise what it is, whether a kind of Knowledge, or Opinion, or Happy
Conjecture, or some other kind of faculty. Knowledge it obviously is
not, because men do not inquire about what they know, and Good Counsel
is a kind of deliberation, and the man who is deliberating is inquiring
and calculating. [Sidenote:1142b]

Neither is it Happy Conjecture; because this is independent of
reasoning, and a rapid operation; but men deliberate a long time, and
it is a common saying that one should execute speedily what has been
resolved upon in deliberation, but deliberate slowly.

Quick perception of causes again is a different faculty from good
counsel, for it is a species of Happy Conjecture. Nor is Good Counsel
Opinion of any kind.

Well then, since he who deliberates ill goes wrong, and he who
deliberates well does so rightly, it is clear that Good Counsel is
rightness of some kind, but not of Knowledge nor of Opinion: for
Knowledge cannot be called right because it cannot be wrong, and
Rightness of Opinion is Truth: and again, all which is the object of
opinion is definitely marked out.

Still, however, Good Counsel is not independent of Reason, Does it
remain then that it is a rightness of Intellectual Operation simply,
because this does not amount to an assertion; and the objection to
Opinion was that it is not a process of inquiry but already a definite
assertion; whereas whosoever deliberates, whether well or ill, is
engaged in inquiry and calculation.

Well, Good Counsel is a Rightness of deliberation, and so the first
question must regard the nature and objects of deliberation. Now
remember Rightness is an equivocal term; we plainly do not mean
Rightness of any kind whatever; the [Greek: akrataes], for instance, or
the bad man, will obtain by his calculation what he sets before him as
an object, and so he may be said to have deliberated _rightly_ in one
sense, but will have attained a great evil. Whereas to have deliberated
well is thought to be a good, because Good Counsel is Rightness of
deliberation of such a nature as is apt to attain good.

But even this again you may get by false reasoning, and hit upon the
right effect though not through right means, your middle term being
fallacious: and so neither will this be yet Good Counsel in consequence
of which you get what you ought but not through proper means.

Again, one man may hit on a thing after long deliberation, another
quickly. And so that before described will not be yet Good Counsel, but
the Rightness must be with reference to what is expedient; and you must
have a proper end in view, pursue it in a right manner and right time.

Once more. One may deliberate well either generally or towards some
particular End. Good counsel in the general then is that which goes
right towards that which is the End in a general way of consideration;
in particular, that which does so towards some particular End.

Since then deliberating well is a quality of men possessed of Practical
Wisdom, Good Counsel must be "Rightness in respect of what conduces to a
given End, of which Practical Wisdom is the true conception." [Sidenote:
X 1143_a_] There is too the faculty of Judiciousness, and also its
absence, in virtue of which we call men Judicious or the contrary.

Now Judiciousness is neither entirely identical with Knowledge or
Opinion (for then all would have been Judicious), nor is it any one
specific science, as medical science whose object matter is things
wholesome; or geometry whose object matter is magnitude: for it has not
for its object things which always exist and are immutable, nor of those
things which come into being just any which may chance; but those in
respect of which a man might doubt and deliberate.

And so it has the same object matter as Practical Wisdom; yet the two
faculties are not identical, because Practical Wisdom has the capacity
for commanding and taking the initiative, for its End is "what one
should do or not do:" but Judiciousness is only apt to decide upon
suggestions (though we do in Greek put "well" on to the faculty and its
concrete noun, these really mean exactly the same as the plain words),
and Judiciousness is neither the having Practical Wisdom, nor attaining
it: but just as learning is termed [Greek: sunievai] when a man uses
his knowledge, so judiciousness consists in employing the Opinionative
faculty in judging concerning those things which come within the
province of Practical Wisdom, when another enunciates them; and not
judging merely, but judging well (for [Greek: eu] and [Greek: kalos]
mean exactly the same thing). And the Greek name of this faculty is
derived from the use of the term [Greek: suvievai] in learning: [Greek:
mavthaveiv] and [Greek: suvievai] being often used as synonymous.

[Sidenote: XI] The faculty called [Greek: gvomh], in right of which we
call men [Greek: euyvomoves], or say they have [Greek: gvomh], is "the
right judgment of the equitable man." A proof of which is that we most
commonly say that the equitable man has a tendency to make allowance,
and the making allowance in certain cases is equitable. And [Greek:
sungvomae] (the word denoting allowance) is right [Greek: gvomh] having
a capacity of making equitable decisions, By "right" I mean that which
attains the True. Now all these mental states tend to the same object,
as indeed common language leads us to expect: I mean, we speak of
[Greek: gnomae], Judiciousness, Practical Wisdom, and Practical
Intuition, attributing the possession of [Greek: gnomae] and Practical
Intuition to the same Individuals whom we denominate Practically-Wise
and Judicious: because all these faculties are employed upon the
extremes, i.e. on particular details; and in right of his aptitude
for deciding on the matters which come within the province of the
Practically-Wise, a man is Judicious and possessed of good [Greek:
gnomae]; i.e. he is disposed to make allowance, for considerations of
equity are entertained by all good men alike in transactions with their
fellows.

And all matters of Moral Action belong to the class of particulars,
otherwise called extremes: for the man of Practical Wisdom must know
them, and Judiciousness and [Greek: gnomae] are concerned with matters
of Moral Actions, which are extremes.

[Sidenote:1143b] Intuition, moreover, takes in the extremes at both
ends: I mean, the first and last terms must be taken in not by reasoning
but by Intuition [so that Intuition comes to be of two kinds], and that
which belongs to strict demonstrative reasonings takes in immutable,
i.e. Necessary, first terms; while that which is employed in practical
matters takes in the extreme, the Contingent, and the minor Premiss: for
the minor Premisses are the source of the Final Cause, Universals being
made up out of Particulars. To take in these, of course, we must have
Sense, i.e. in other words Practical Intuition. And for this reason
these are thought to be simply gifts of nature; and whereas no man is
thought to be Scientific by nature, men are thought to have [Greek:
gnomae], and Judiciousness, and Practical Intuition: a proof of which is
that we think these faculties are a consequence even of particular ages,
and this given age has Practical Intuition and [Greek: gnomae], we say,
as if under the notion that nature is the cause. And thus Intuition is
both the beginning and end, because the proofs are based upon the one
kind of extremes and concern the other.

And so one should attend to the undemonstrable dicta and opinions of the
skilful, the old and the Practically-Wise, no less than to those which
are based on strict reasoning, because they see aright, having gained
their power of moral vision from experience.

XII

Well, we have now stated the nature and objects of Practical Wisdom and
Science respectively, and that they belong each to a different part
of the Soul. But I can conceive a person questioning their utility.
"Science," he would say, "concerns itself with none of the causes of
human happiness (for it has nothing to do with producing anything):
Practical Wisdom has this recommendation, I grant, but where is the need
of it, since its province is those things which are just and honourable,
and good for man, and these are the things which the good man as such
does; but we are not a bit the more apt to do them because we know them,
since the Moral Virtues are Habits; just as we are not more apt to be
healthy or in good condition from mere knowledge of what relates to
these (I mean, of course, things so called not from their producing
health, etc., but from their evidencing it in a particular subject),
for we are not more apt to be healthy and in good condition merely from
knowing the art of medicine or training.

"If it be urged that _knowing what is_ good does not by itself make a
Practically-Wise man but _becoming_ good; still this Wisdom will be no
use either to those that are good, and so have it already, or to those
who have it not; because it will make no difference to them whether they
have it themselves or put themselves under the guidance of others who
have; and we might be contented to be in respect of this as in respect
of health: for though we wish to be healthy still we do not set about
learning the art of healing.

"Furthermore, it would seem to be strange that, though lower in the
scale than Science, it is to be its master; which it is, because
whatever produces results takes the rule and directs in each matter."

This then is what we are to talk about, for these are the only points
now raised.

[Sidenote:1144a] Now first we say that being respectively Excellences
of different parts of the Soul they must be choiceworthy, even on the
supposition that they neither of them produce results.

In the next place we say that they _do_ produce results; that Science
makes Happiness, not as the medical art but as healthiness makes health:
because, being a part of Virtue in its most extensive sense, it makes a
man happy by being possessed and by working.

Next, Man's work _as Man_ is accomplished by virtue of Practical Wisdom
and Moral Virtue, the latter giving the right aim and direction, the
former the right means to its attainment; but of the fourth part of the
Soul, the mere nutritive principle, there is no such Excellence, because
nothing is in its power to do or leave undone.

As to our not being more apt to do what is noble and just by reason of
possessing Practical Wisdom, we must begin a little higher up, taking
this for our starting-point. As we say that men may do things in
themselves just and yet not be just men; for instance, when men do what
the laws require of them, either against their will, or by reason of
ignorance or something else, at all events not for the sake of the
things themselves; and yet they do what they ought and all that the good
man should do; so it seems that to be a good man one must do each act in
a particular frame of mind, I mean from Moral Choice and for the sake of
the things themselves which are done. Now it is Virtue which makes the
Moral Choice right, but whatever is naturally required to carry out
that Choice comes under the province not of Virtue but of a different
faculty. We must halt, as it were, awhile, and speak more clearly on
these points.

There is then a certain faculty, commonly named Cleverness, of such a
nature as to be able to do and attain whatever conduces to _any_ given
purpose: now if that purpose be a good one the faculty is praiseworthy;
if otherwise, it goes by a name which, denoting strictly the ability,
implies the willingness to do _anything_; we accordingly call the
Practically-Wise Clever, and also those who can and will do anything.

Now Practical Wisdom is not identical with Cleverness, nor is it without
this power of adapting means to ends: but this Eye of the Soul (as we
may call it) does not attain its proper state without goodness, as we
have said before and as is quite plain, because the syllogisms into
which Moral Action may be analysed have for their Major Premiss, "since
----------is the End and the Chief Good" (fill up the blank with just
anything you please, for we merely want to exhibit the Form, so that
anything will do), but _how_ this blank should be filled is seen only by
the good man: because Vice distorts the moral vision and causes men to
be deceived in respect of practical principles.

It is clear, therefore, that a man cannot be a Practically-Wise,
without being a good, man.

XIII

[Sidenote:1144b] We must inquire again also about Virtue: for it may be
divided into Natural Virtue and Matured, which two bear to each other a
relation similar to that which Practical Wisdom bears to Cleverness, one
not of identity but resemblance. I speak of Natural Virtue, because men
hold that each of the moral dispositions attach to us all somehow by
nature: we have dispositions towards justice, self-mastery and courage,
for instance, immediately from our birth: but still we seek Goodness
in its highest sense as something distinct from these, and that these
dispositions should attach to us in a somewhat different fashion.
Children and brutes have these natural states, but then they are plainly
hurtful unless combined with an intellectual element: at least thus much
is matter of actual experience and observation, that as a strong body
destitute of sight must, if set in motion, fall violently because it has
not sight, so it is also in the case we are considering: but if it can
get the intellectual element it then excels in acting. Just so the
Natural State of Virtue, being like this strong body, will then
be Virtue in the highest sense when it too is combined with the
intellectual element.

So that, as in the case of the Opinionative faculty, there are two
forms, Cleverness and Practical Wisdom; so also in the case of the Moral
there are two, Natural Virtue and Matured; and of these the latter
cannot be formed without Practical Wisdom.

This leads some to say that all the Virtues are merely intellectual
Practical Wisdom, and Socrates was partly right in his inquiry and
partly wrong: wrong in that he thought all the Virtues were merely
intellectual Practical Wisdom, right in saying they were not independent
of that faculty.

A proof of which is that now all, in defining Virtue, add on the "state"
[mentioning also to what standard it has reference, namely that] "which
is accordant with Right Reason:" now "right" means in accordance with
Practical Wisdom. So then all seem to have an instinctive notion that
that state which is in accordance with Practical Wisdom is Virtue;
however, we must make a slight change in their statement, because that
state is Virtue, not merely which is in accordance with but which
implies the possession of Right Reason; which, upon such matters, is
Practical Wisdom. The difference between us and Socrates is this: he
thought the Virtues were reasoning processes (_i.e._ that they were all
instances of Knowledge in its strict sense), but we say they imply the
possession of Reason.

From what has been said then it is clear that one cannot be, strictly
speaking, good without Practical Wisdom nor Practically-Wise without
moral goodness.

And by the distinction between Natural and Matured Virtue one can
meet the reasoning by which it might be argued "that the Virtues are
separable because the same man is not by nature most inclined to all at
once so that he will have acquired this one before he has that other:"
we would reply that this is possible with respect to the Natural Virtues
but not with respect to those in right of which a man is denominated
simply good: because they will all belong to him together with the one
faculty of Practical Wisdom. [Sidenote:1145a]

It is plain too that even had it not been apt to act we should have
needed it, because it is the Excellence of a part of the Soul; and that
the moral choice cannot be right independently of Practical Wisdom and
Moral Goodness; because this gives the right End, that causes the doing
these things which conduce to the End.

Then again, it is not Master of Science (i.e. of the superior part of
the Soul), just as neither is the healing art Master of health; for it
does not make use of it, but looks how it may come to be: so it commands
for the sake of it but does not command it.

The objection is, in fact, about as valid as if a man should say
[Greek: politikae] governs the gods because it gives orders about all
things in the communty.


APPENDIX

On [Greek: epistaemae], from I. Post. Analyt. chap. i. and ii.

(Such parts only are translated as throw light on the Ethics.)

All teaching, and all intellectual learning, proceeds on the basis
of previous knowledge, as will appear on an examination of all. The
Mathematical Sciences, and every other system, draw their conclusions in
this method. So too of reasonings, whether by syllogism, or induction:
for both teach through what is previously known, the former assuming
the premisses as from wise men, the latter proving universals from
the evidentness of the particulars. In like manner too rhetoricians
persuade, either through examples (which amounts to induction), or
through enthymemes (which amounts to syllogism).

Well, we suppose that we _know_ things (in the strict and proper sense
of the word) when we suppose ourselves to know the cause by reason
of which the thing is to be the cause of it; and that this cannot be
otherwise. It is plain that the idea intended to be conveyed by the term
_knowing_ is something of this kind; because they who do not really know
suppose themselves thus related to the matter in hand and they who
do know really are so that of whatsoever there is properly speaking
Knowledge this cannot be otherwise than it is Whether or no there is
another way of knowing we will say afterwards, but we do say that we
know through demonstration, by which I mean a syllogism apt to produce
Knowledge, i.e. in right of which through having it, we know.

If Knowledge then is such as we have described it, the Knowledge
produced by demonstrative reasoning must be drawn from premisses _true_
and _first_, and _incapable of syllogistic proof_, and _better known_,
and _prior in order of time_, and _causes of the conclusion_, for so the
principles will be akin to the conclusion demonstrated.

(Syllogism, of course there may be without such premisses, but it will
not be demonstration because it will not produce knowledge).

_True_, they must be, because it is impossible to know that which is not.

_First_, that is indemonstrable, because, if demonstrable, he cannot be
said to _know_ them who has no demonstration of them for knowing such
things as are demonstrable is the same as having demonstration of them.

_Causes_ they must be, and _better known_, and _prior_ in time,
_causes_, because we then know when we are acquainted with the cause,
and _prior_, if causes, and _known beforehand_, not merely comprehended
in idea but known to exist (The terms prior, and better known, bear two
senses for _prior by nature_ and _prior relatively to ourselves_ are not
the same, nor _better known by nature_, and _better known to us_ I mean,
by _prior_ and _better known relatively to ourselves_, such things as
are nearer to sensation, but abstractedly so such as are further
Those are furthest which are most universal those nearest which are
particulars, and these are mutually opposed) And by _first_, I mean
_principles akin to the conclusion_, for principle means the same as
first And the principle or first step in demonstration is a proposition
incapable of syllogistic proof, i. e. one to which there is none prior.
Now of such syllogistic principles I call that a [Greek: thxsis] which
you cannot demonstrate, and which is unnecessary with a view to learning
something else. That which is necessary in order to learn something else
is an Axiom.

Further, since one is to believe and know the thing by having a
syllogism of the kind called demonstration, and what constitutes it to
be such is the nature of the premisses, it is necessary not merely to
_know before_, but to _know better than the conclusion_, either all or
at least some of, the principles, because that which is the cause of a
quality inhering in something else always inheres itself more as the
cause of our loving is itself more lovable. So, since the principles are
the cause of our knowing and behoving we know and believe them more,
because by reason of them we know also the conclusion following.

Further: the man who is to have the Knowledge which comes through
demonstration must not merely know and believe his principles better
than he does his conclusion, but he must believe nothing more firmly
than the contradictories of those principles out of which the contrary
fallacy may be constructed: since he who _knows_, is to be simply and
absolutely infallible.




BOOK VII



I

Next we must take a different point to start from, and observe that of
what is to be avoided in respect of moral character there are three
forms; Vice, Imperfect Self-Control, and Brutishness. Of the two former
it is plain what the contraries are, for we call the one Virtue, the
other Self-Control; and as answering to Brutishness it will be most
suitable to assign Superhuman, i.e. heroical and godlike Virtue, as, in
Homer, Priam says of Hector "that he was very excellent, nor was he like
the offspring of mortal man, but of a god." and so, if, as is commonly
said, men are raised to the position of gods by reason of very high
excellence in Virtue, the state opposed to the Brutish will plainly be
of this nature: because as brutes are not virtuous or vicious so neither
are gods; but the state of these is something more precious than Virtue,
of the former something different in kind from Vice.

And as, on the one hand, it is a rare thing for a man to be godlike (a
term the Lacedaemonians are accustomed to use when they admire a man
exceedingly; [Greek:seios anhæp] they call him), so the brutish man is
rare; the character is found most among barbarians, and some cases of it
are caused by disease or maiming; also such men as exceed in vice all
ordinary measures we therefore designate by this opprobrious term. Well,
we must in a subsequent place make some mention of this disposition,
and Vice has been spoken of before: for the present we must speak of
Imperfect Self-Control and its kindred faults of Softness and Luxury, on
the one hand, and of Self-Control and Endurance on the other; since we
are to conceive of them, not as being the same states exactly as Virtue
and Vice respectively, nor again as differing in kind. [Sidenote:1145b]
And we should adopt the same course as before, i.e. state the phenomena,
and, after raising and discussing difficulties which suggest themselves,
then exhibit, if possible, all the opinions afloat respecting these
affections of the moral character; or, if not all, the greater part and
the most important: for we may consider we have illustrated the matter
sufficiently when the difficulties have been solved, and such theories
as are most approved are left as a residuum.

The chief points may be thus enumerated. It is thought,

I. That Self-Control and Endurance belong to the class of things good
and praiseworthy, while Imperfect Self-Control and Softness belong to
that of things low and blameworthy.

II. That the man of Self-Control is identical with the man who is apt to
abide by his resolution, and the man of Imperfect Self-Control with him
who is apt to depart from his resolution.

III. That the man of Imperfect Self-Control does things at the
instigation of his passions, knowing them to be wrong, while the man of
Self-Control, knowing his lusts to be wrong, refuses, by the influence
of reason, to follow their suggestions.

IV. That the man of Perfected Self-Mastery unites the qualities of
Self-Control and Endurance, and some say that every one who unites these
is a man of Perfect Self-Mastery, others do not.

V. Some confound the two characters of the man who has _no_
Self-Control, and the man of _Imperfect Self-Control_, while others
distinguish between them.

VI. It is sometimes said that the man of Practical Wisdom cannot be a
man of Imperfect Self-Control, sometimes that men who are Practically
Wise and Clever are of Imperfect Self-Control.

VII. Again, men are said to be of Imperfect Self-Control, not simply
but with the addition of the thing wherein, as in respect of anger, of
honour, and gain.

These then are pretty well the common statements.

II

Now a man may raise a question as to the nature of the right conception
in violation of which a man fails of Self-Control.

That he can so fail when _knowing_ in the strict sense what is right
some say is impossible: for it is a strange thing, as Socrates thought,
that while Knowledge is present in his mind something else should
master him and drag him about like a slave. Socrates in fact contended
generally against the theory, maintaining there is no such state as that
of Imperfect Self-Control, for that no one acts contrary to what is best
conceiving it to be best but by reason of ignorance what is best.

With all due respect to Socrates, his account of the matter is at
variance with plain facts, and we must inquire with respect to the
affection, if it be caused by ignorance what is the nature of the
ignorance: for that the man so failing does not suppose his acts to be
right before he is under the influence of passion is quite plain.

There are people who partly agree with Socrates and partly not: that
nothing can be stronger than Knowledge they agree, but that no man acts
in contravention of his conviction of what is better they do not agree;
and so they say that it is not Knowledge, but only Opinion, which the
man in question has and yet yields to the instigation of his pleasures.

[Sidenote:1146a] But then, if it is Opinion and not Knowledge, that is
it the opposing conception be not strong but only mild (as in the case
of real doubt), the not abiding by it in the face of strong lusts would
be excusable: but wickedness is not excusable, nor is anything which
deserves blame.

Well then, is it Practical Wisdom which in this case offers opposition:
for that is the strongest principle? The supposition is absurd, for
we shall have the same man uniting Practical Wisdom and Imperfect
Self-Control, and surely no single person would maintain that it is
consistent with the character of Practical Wisdom to do voluntarily what
is very wrong; and besides we have shown before that the very mark of
a man of this character is aptitude to act, as distinguished from
mere knowledge of what is right; because he is a man conversant with
particular details, and possessed of all the other virtues.

Again, if the having strong and bad lusts is necessary to the idea of
the man of Self-Control, this character cannot be identical with the man
of Perfected Self-Mastery, because the having strong desires or bad ones
does not enter into the idea of this latter character: and yet the man
of Self-Control must have such: for suppose them good; then the moral
state which should hinder a man from following their suggestions must be
bad, and so Self-Control would not be in all cases good: suppose them on
the other hand to be weak and not wrong, it would be nothing grand; nor
anything great, supposing them to be wrong and weak.

Again, if Self-Control makes a man apt to abide by all opinions without
exception, it may be bad, as suppose the case of a false opinion: and
if Imperfect Self-Control makes a man apt to depart from all without
exception, we shall have cases where it will be good; take that of
Neoptolemus in the Philoctetes of Sophocles, for instance: he is to be
praised for not abiding by what he was persuaded to by Ulysses, because
he was pained at being guilty of falsehood.

Or again, false sophistical reasoning presents a difficulty: for because
men wish to prove paradoxes that they may be counted clever when they
succeed, the reasoning that has been used becomes a difficulty: for the
intellect is fettered; a man being unwilling to abide by the conclusion
because it does not please his judgment, but unable to advance because
he cannot disentangle the web of sophistical reasoning.

Or again, it is conceivable on this supposition that folly joined with
Imperfect Self-Control may turn out, in a given case, goodness: for by
reason of his imperfection of self-control a man acts in a way which
contradicts his notions; now his notion is that what is really good is
bad and ought not to be done; and so he will eventually do what is good
and not what is bad.

Again, on the same supposition, the man who acting on conviction pursues
and chooses things because they are pleasant must be thought a better
man than he who does so not by reason of a quasi-rational conviction but
of Imperfect Self-Control: because he is more open to cure by reason of
the possibility of his receiving a contrary conviction. But to the man
of Imperfect Self-Control would apply the proverb, "when water chokes,
what should a man drink then?" for had he never been convinced at all
in respect of [Sidenote: 1146b] what he does, then by a conviction in a
contrary direction he might have stopped in his course; but now though
he has had convictions he notwithstanding acts against them.

Again, if any and every thing is the object-matter of Imperfect and
Perfect Self-Control, who is the man of Imperfect Self-Control simply?
because no one unites all cases of it, and we commonly say that some men
are so simply, not adding any particular thing in which they are so.

Well, the difficulties raised are pretty near such as I have described
them, and of these theories we must remove some and leave others as
established; because the solving of a difficulty is a positive act of
establishing something as true.

III

Now we must examine first whether men of Imperfect Self-Control act with
a knowledge of what is right or not: next, if with such knowledge, in
what sense; and next what are we to assume is the object-matter of the
man of Imperfect Self-Control, and of the man of Self-Control; I mean,
whether pleasure and pain of all kinds or certain definite ones; and as
to Self-Control and Endurance, whether these are designations of the
same character or different. And in like manner we must go into all
questions which are connected with the present.

But the real starting point of the inquiry is, whether the two
characters of Self-Control and Imperfect Self-Control are distinguished
by their object-matter, or their respective relations to it. I mean,
whether the man of Imperfect Self-Control is such simply by virtue of
having such and such object-matter; or not, but by virtue of his being
related to it in such and such a way, or by virtue of both: next,
whether Self-Control and Imperfect Self-Control are unlimited in their
object-matter: because he who is designated without any addition a man
of Imperfect Self-Control is not unlimited in his object-matter, but has
exactly the same as the man who has lost all Self-Control: nor is he so
designated because of his relation to this object-matter merely (for
then his character would be identical with that just mentioned, loss
of all Self-Control), but because of his relation to it being such
and such. For the man who has lost all Self-Control is led on with
deliberate moral choice, holding that it is his line to pursue pleasure
as it rises: while the man of Imperfect Self-Control does not think that
he ought to pursue it, but does pursue it all the same.

Now as to the notion that it is True Opinion and not Knowledge in
contravention of which men fail in Self-Control, it makes no difference
to the point in question, because some of those who hold Opinions have
no doubt about them but suppose themselves to have accurate Knowledge;
if then it is urged that men holding Opinions will be more likely than
men who have Knowledge to act in contravention of their conceptions,
as having but a moderate belief in them; we reply, Knowledge will not
differ in this respect from Opinion: because some men believe their
own Opinions no less firmly than others do their positive Knowledge:
Heraclitus is a case in point.

Rather the following is the account of it: the term _knowing_ has two
senses; both the man who does not use his Knowledge, and he who does,
are said to _know_: there will be a difference between a man's acting
wrongly, who though possessed of Knowledge does not call it into
operation, and his doing so who has it and actually exercises it: the
latter is a strange case, but the mere having, if not exercising,
presents no anomaly.

[Sidenote:1147a] Again, as there are two kinds of propositions affecting
action, universal and particular, there is no reason why a man may not
act against his Knowledge, having both propositions in his mind, using
the universal but not the particular, for the particulars are the
objects of moral action.

There is a difference also in universal propositions; a universal
proposition may relate partly to a man's self and partly to the thing in
question: take the following for instance; "dry food is good for every
man," this may have the two minor premisses, "this is a man," and "so
and so is dry food;" but whether a given substance is so and so a man
either has not the Knowledge or does not exert it. According to these
different senses there will be an immense difference, so that for a
man to _know_ in the one sense, and yet act wrongly, would be nothing
strange, but in any of the other senses it would be a matter for wonder.

Again, men may have Knowledge in a way different from any of those which
have been now stated: for we constantly see a man's state so differing
by having and not using Knowledge, that he has it in a sense and also
has not; when a man is asleep, for instance, or mad, or drunk: well, men
under the actual operation of passion are in exactly similar conditions;
for anger, lust, and some other such-like things, manifestly make
changes even in the body, and in some they even cause madness; it is
plain then that we must say the men of Imperfect Self-Control are in a
state similar to these.

And their saying what embodies Knowledge is no proof of their actually
then exercising it, because they who are under the operation of these
passions repeat demonstrations; or verses of Empedocles, just as
children, when first learning, string words together, but as yet know
nothing of their meaning, because they must grow into it, and this is a
process requiring time: so that we must suppose these men who fail in
Self-Control to say these moral sayings just as actors do. Furthermore,
a man may look at the account of the phænomenon in the following way,
from an examination of the actual working of the mind: All action may
be analysed into a syllogism, in which the one premiss is an universal
maxim and the other concerns particulars of which Sense [moral or
physical, as the case may be] is cognisant: now when one results from
these two, it follows necessarily that, as far as theory goes the mind
must assert the conclusion, and in practical propositions the man must
act accordingly. For instance, let the universal be, "All that is
sweet should be tasted," the particular, "This is sweet;" it follows
necessarily that he who is able and is not hindered should not only
draw, but put in practice, the conclusion "This is to be tasted." When
then there is in the mind one universal proposition forbidding to taste,
and the other "All that is sweet is pleasant" with its minor "This is
sweet" (which is the one that really works), and desire happens to be in
the man, the first universal bids him avoid this but the desire leads
him on to taste; for it has the power of moving the various organs:
and so it results that he fails in Self-Control, [Sidenote:1147b] in a
certain sense under the influence of Reason and Opinion not contrary in
itself to Reason but only accidentally so; because it is the desire that
is contrary to Right Reason, but not the Opinion: and so for this reason
brutes are not accounted of Imperfect Self-Control, because they have
no power of conceiving universals but only of receiving and retaining
particular impressions.

As to the manner in which the ignorance is removed and the man of
Imperfect Self-Control recovers his Knowledge, the account is the same
as with respect to him who is drunk or asleep, and is not peculiar to
this affection, so physiologists are the right people to apply to. But
whereas the minor premiss of every practical syllogism is an opinion on
matter cognisable by Sense and determines the actions; he who is under
the influence of passion either has not this, or so has it that his
having does not amount to _knowing_ but merely saying, as a man when
drunk might repeat Empedocles' verses; and because the minor term
is neither universal, nor is thought to have the power of producing
Knowledge in like manner as the universal term: and so the result which
Socrates was seeking comes out, that is to say, the affection does not
take place in the presence of that which is thought to be specially
and properly Knowledge, nor is this dragged about by reason of the
affection, but in the presence of that Knowledge which is conveyed by
Sense.

Let this account then be accepted of the question respecting the failure
in Self-Control, whether it is with Knowledge or not; and, if with
knowledge, with what kind of knowledge such failure is possible.

IV

The next question to be discussed is whether there is a character to be
designated by the term "of Imperfect Self-Control" simply, or whether
all who are so are to be accounted such, in respect of some particular
thing; and, if there is such a character, what is his object-matter.

Now that pleasures and pains are the object-matter of men of
Self-Control and of Endurance, and also of men of Imperfect Self-Control
and Softness, is plain.

Further, things which produce pleasure are either necessary, or objects
of choice in themselves but yet admitting of excess. All bodily things
which produce pleasure are necessary; and I call such those which relate
to food and other grosser appetities, in short such bodily things as
we assumed were the Object-matter of absence of Self-Control and of
Perfected Self-Mastery.

The other class of objects are not necessary, but objects of choice in
themselves: I mean, for instance, victory, honour, wealth, and such-like
good or pleasant things. And those who are excessive in their liking for
such things contrary to the principle of Right Reason which is in their
own breasts we do not designate men of Imperfect Self-Control simply,
but with the addition of the thing wherein, as in respect of money, or
gain, or honour, or anger, and not simply; because we consider them as
different characters and only having that title in right of a kind of
resemblance (as when we add to a man's name "conqueror in the Olympic
games" the account of him as Man differs but little from the account
of him as the Man who conquered in the Olympic games, but still it is
different). And a proof of the real [Sidenote: 1148a] difference between
these so designated with an addition and those simply so called is this,
that Imperfect Self-Control is blamed, not as an error merely but also
as being a vice, either wholly or partially; but none of these other
cases is so blamed.

But of those who have for their object-matter the bodily enjoyments,
which we say are also the object-matter of the man of Perfected
Self-Mastery and the man who has lost all Self-Control, he that pursues
excessive pleasures and too much avoids things which are painful (as
hunger and thirst, heat and cold, and everything connected with touch
and taste), not from moral choice but in spite of his moral choice and
intellectual conviction, is termed "a man of Imperfect Self-Control,"
not with the addition of any particular object-matter as we do in
respect of want of control of anger but simply.

And a proof that the term is thus applied is that the kindred term
"Soft" is used in respect of these enjoyments but not in respect of any
of those others. And for this reason we put into the same rank the man
of Imperfect Self-Control, the man who has lost it entirely, the man
who has it, and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery; but not any of those
other characters, because the former have for their object-matter the
same pleasures and pains: but though they have the same object-matter,
they are not related to it in the same way, but two of them act upon
moral choice, two without it. And so we should say that man is more
entirely given up to his passions who pursues excessive pleasures, and
avoids moderate pains, being either not at all, or at least but little,
urged by desire, than the man who does so because his desire is very
strong: because we think what would the former be likely to do if he had
the additional stimulus of youthful lust and violent pain consequent on
the want of those pleasures which we have denominated necessary?

Well then, since of desires and pleasures there are some which are in
kind honourable and good (because things pleasant are divisible, as we
said before, into such as are naturally objects of choice, such as
are naturally objects of avoidance, and such as are in themselves
indifferent, money, gain, honour, victory, for instance); in respect of
all such and those that are indifferent, men are blamed not merely for
being affected by or desiring or liking them, but for exceeding in any
way in these feelings.

And so they are blamed, whosoever in spite of Reason are mastered by,
that is pursue, any object, though in its nature noble and good; they,
for instance, who are more earnest than they should be respecting
honour, or their children or parents; not but what these are good
objects and men are praised for being earnest about them: but still they
admit of excess; for instance, if any one, as Niobe did, should fight
even against the gods, or feel towards his father as Satyrus, who got
therefrom the nickname of [Greek: philophator], [Sidenote: 1148b]
because he was thought to be very foolish.

Now depravity there is none in regard of these things, for the reason
assigned above, that each of them in itself is a thing naturally
choiceworthy, yet the excesses in respect of them are wrong and matter
for blame: and similarly there is no Imperfect Self-Control in respect
of these things; that being not merely a thing that should be avoided
but blameworthy.

But because of the resemblance of the affection to the Imperfection of
Self-Control the term is used with the addition in each case of the
particular object-matter, just as men call a man a bad physician, or bad
actor, whom they would not think of calling simply bad. As then in these
cases we do not apply the term simply because each of the states is not
a vice, but only like a vice in the way of analogy, so it is plain that
in respect of Imperfect Self-Control and Self-Control we must limit the
names to those states which have the same object-matter as Perfected
Self-Mastery and utter loss of Self-Control, and that we do apply it to
the case of anger only in the way of resemblance: for which reason, with
an addition, we designate a man of Imperfect Self-Control in respect of
anger, as of honour or of gain.

V

As there are some things naturally pleasant, and of these two kinds;
those, namely, which are pleasant generally, and those which are so
relatively to particular kinds of animals and men; so there are others
which are not naturally pleasant but which come to be so in consequence
either of maimings, or custom, or depraved natural tastes: and one may
observe moral states similar to those we have been speaking of, having
respectively these classes of things for their object-matter.

I mean the Brutish, as in the case of the female who, they say, would
rip up women with child and eat the foetus; or the tastes which are
found among the savage tribes bordering on the Pontus, some liking raw
flesh, and some being cannibals, and some lending one another their
children to make feasts of; or what is said of Phalaris. These are
instances of Brutish states, caused in some by disease or madness; take,
for instance, the man who sacrificed and ate his mother, or him who
devoured the liver of his fellow-servant. Instances again of those
caused by disease or by custom, would be, plucking out of hair, or
eating one's nails, or eating coals and earth. ... Now wherever nature
is really the cause no one would think of calling men of Imperfect
Self-Control, ... nor, in like manner, such as are in a diseased state
through custom.

[Sidenote:1149a] Obviously the having any of these inclinations is
something foreign to what is denominated Vice, just as Brutishness is:
and when a man has them his mastering them is not properly Self-Control,
nor his being mastered by them Imperfection of Self-Control in the
proper sense, but only in the way of resemblance; just as we may say a
man of ungovernable wrath fails of Self-Control in respect of anger but
not simply fails of Self-Control. For all excessive folly, cowardice,
absence of Self-Control, or irritability, are either Brutish or morbid.
The man, for instance, who is naturally afraid of all things, even if
a mouse should stir, is cowardly after a Brutish sort; there was a man
again who, by reason of disease, was afraid of a cat: and of the fools,
they who are naturally destitute of Reason and live only by Sense are
Brutish, as are some tribes of the far-off barbarians, while others
who are so by reason of diseases, epileptic or frantic, are in morbid
states.

So then, of these inclinations, a man may sometimes merely have one
without yielding to it: I mean, suppose that Phalaris had restrained his
unnatural desire to eat a child: or he may both have and yield to it. As
then Vice when such as belongs to human nature is called Vice simply,
while the other is so called with the addition of "brutish" or "morbid,"
but not simply Vice, so manifestly there is Brutish and Morbid
Imperfection of Self-Control, but that alone is entitled to the name
without any qualification which is of the nature of utter absence of
Self-Control, as it is found in Man.

VI

It is plain then that the object-matter of Imperfect Self-Control and
Self-Control is restricted to the same as that of utter absence of
Self-Control and that of Perfected Self-Mastery, and that the rest is
the object-matter of a different species so named metaphorically and not
simply: we will now examine the position, "that Imperfect Self-Control
in respect of Anger is less disgraceful than that in respect of Lusts."

In the first place, it seems that Anger does in a way listen to Reason
but mishears it; as quick servants who run out before they have heard
the whole of what is said and then mistake the order; dogs, again, bark
at the slightest stir, before they have seen whether it be friend
or foe; just so Anger, by reason of its natural heat and quickness,
listening to Reason, but without having heard the command of Reason,
rushes to its revenge. That is to say, Reason or some impression on the
mind shows there is insolence or contempt in the offender, and then
Anger, reasoning as it were that one ought to fight against what is
such, fires up immediately: whereas Lust, if Reason or Sense, as the
case may be, merely says a thing is sweet, rushes to the enjoyment of
it: and so Anger follows Reason in a manner, but Lust does not and is
therefore more disgraceful: because he that cannot control his anger
yields in a manner to Reason, but the other to his Lust and not to
Reason at all. [Sidenote:1149b]

Again, a man is more excusable for following such desires as are
natural, just as he is for following such Lusts as are common to all and
to that degree in which they are common. Now Anger and irritability are
more natural than Lusts when in excess and for objects not necessary.
(This was the ground of the defence the man made who beat his father,
"My father," he said, "used to beat his, and his father his again, and
this little fellow here," pointing to his child, "will beat me when he
is grown a man: it runs in the family." And the father, as he was being
dragged along, bid his son leave off beating him at the door, because he
had himself been used to drag his father so far and no farther.)

Again, characters are less unjust in proportion as they involve less
insidiousness. Now the Angry man is not insidious, nor is Anger, but
quite open: but Lust is: as they say of Venus,

  "Cyprus-born Goddess, _weaver of deceits_"

Or Homer of the girdle called the Cestus,

  "Persuasiveness _cheating_ e'en the subtlest mind."

And so since this kind of Imperfect Self-Control is more unjust, it
is also more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and is simply
Imperfect Self-Control, and Vice in a certain sense. Again, no man feels
pain in being insolent, but every one who acts through Anger does act
with pain; and he who acts insolently does it with pleasure. If then
those things are most unjust with which we have most right to be angry,
then Imperfect Self-Control, arising from Lust, is more so than that
arising from Anger: because in Anger there is no insolence.

Well then, it is clear that Imperfect Self-Control in respect of
Lusts is more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and that the
object-matter of Self-Control, and the Imperfection of it, are bodily
Lusts and pleasures; but of these last we must take into account the
differences; for, as was said at the commencement, some are proper to
the human race and natural both in kind and degree, others Brutish, and
others caused by maimings and diseases.

Now the first of these only are the object-matter of Perfected
Self-Mastery and utter absence of Self-Control; and therefore we never
attribute either of these states to Brutes (except metaphorically,
and whenever any one kind of animal differs entirely from another in
insolence, mischievousness, or voracity), because they have not moral
choice or process of deliberation, but are quite different from that
kind of creature just as are madmen from other men.

[Sidenote: 1150a] Brutishness is not so low in the scale as Vice, yet
it is to be regarded with more fear: because it is not that the highest
principle has been corrupted, as in the human creature, but the subject
has it not at all.

It is much the same, therefore, as if one should compare an inanimate
with an animate being, which were the worse: for the badness of that
which has no principle of origination is always less harmful; now
Intellect is a principle of origination. A similar case would be the
comparing injustice and an unjust man together: for in different ways
each is the worst: a bad man would produce ten thousand times as much
harm as a bad brute.

VII

Now with respect to the pleasures and pains which come to a man through
Touch and Taste, and the desiring or avoiding such (which we determined
before to constitute the object-matter of the states of utter absence of
Self-Control and Perfected Self-Mastery), one may be so disposed as
to yield to temptations to which most men would be superior, or to
be superior to those to which most men would yield: in respect of
pleasures, these characters will be respectively the man of Imperfect
Self-Control, and the man of Self-Control; and, in respect of pains, the
man of Softness and the man of Endurance: but the moral state of most
men is something between the two, even though they lean somewhat to the
worse characters.

Again, since of the pleasures indicated some are necessary and some are
not, others are so to a certain degree but not the excess or defect of
them, and similarly also of Lusts and pains, the man who pursues the
excess of pleasant things, or such as are in themselves excess, or from
moral choice, for their own sake, and not for anything else which is to
result from them, is a man utterly void of Self-Control: for he must be
incapable of remorse, and so incurable, because he that has not remorse
is incurable. (He that has too little love of pleasure is the opposite
character, and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery the mean character.) He
is of a similar character who avoids the bodily pains, not because he
_cannot_, but because he _chooses not to_, withstand them.

But of the characters who go wrong without _choosing_ so to do, the one
is led on by reason of pleasure, the other because he avoids the pain it
would cost him to deny his lust; and so they are different the one from
the other. Now every one would pronounce a man worse for doing something
base without any impulse of desire, or with a very slight one, than for
doing the same from the impulse of a very strong desire; for striking
a man when not angry than if he did so in wrath: because one naturally
says, "What would he have done had he been under the influence of
passion?" (and on this ground, by the bye, the man utterly void of
Self-Control is worse than he who has it imperfectly). However, of the
two characters which have been mentioned [as included in that of utter
absence of Self-Control], the one is rather Softness, the other properly
the man of no Self-Control.

Furthermore, to the character of Imperfect Self-Control is opposed that
of Self-Control, and to that of Softness that of Endurance: because
Endurance consists in continued resistance but Self-Control in actual
mastery, and continued resistance and actual mastery are as different
as not being conquered is from conquering; and so Self-Control is more
choiceworthy than Endurance.

[Sidenote:1150b] Again, he who fails when exposed to those temptations
against which the common run of men hold out, and are well able to do
so, is Soft and Luxurious (Luxury being a kind of Softness): the kind of
man, I mean, to let his robe drag in the dirt to avoid the trouble
of lifting it, and who, aping the sick man, does not however suppose
himself wretched though he is like a wretched man. So it is too with
respect to Self-Control and the Imperfection of it: if a man yields to
pleasures or pains which are violent and excessive it is no matter for
wonder, but rather for allowance if he made what resistance he could
(instances are, Philoctetes in Theodectes' drama when wounded by the
viper; or Cercyon in the Alope of Carcinus, or men who in trying to
suppress laughter burst into a loud continuous fit of it, as happened,
you remember, to Xenophantus), but it is a matter for wonder when a man
yields to and cannot contend against those pleasures or pains which the
common herd are able to resist; always supposing his failure not to be
owing to natural constitution or disease, I mean, as the Scythian kings
are constitutionally Soft, or the natural difference between the sexes.

Again, the man who is a slave to amusement is commonly thought to be
destitute of Self-Control, but he really is Soft; because amusement
is an act of relaxing, being an act of resting, and the character in
question is one of those who exceed due bounds in respect of this.

Moreover of Imperfect Self-Control there are two forms, Precipitancy and
Weakness: those who have it in the latter form though they have made
resolutions do not abide by them by reason of passion; the others are
led by passion because they have never formed any resolutions at
all: while there are some who, like those who by tickling themselves
beforehand get rid of ticklishness, having felt and seen beforehand the
approach of temptation, and roused up themselves and their resolution,
yield not to passion; whether the temptation be somewhat pleasant or
somewhat painful. The Precipitate form of Imperfect Self-Control they
are most liable to who are constitutionally of a sharp or melancholy
temperament: because the one by reason of the swiftness, the other by
reason of the violence, of their passions, do not wait for Reason,
because they are disposed to follow whatever notion is impressed upon
their minds.

VIII

Again, the man utterly destitute of Self-Control, as was observed
before, is not given to remorse: for it is part of his character that
he abides by his moral choice: but the man of Imperfect Self-Control is
almost made up of remorse: and so the case is not as we determined it
before, but the former is incurable and the latter may be cured: for
depravity is like chronic diseases, dropsy and consumption for instance,
but Imperfect Self-Control is like acute disorders: the former being a
continuous evil, the latter not so. And, in fact, Imperfect Self-Control
and Confirmed Vice are different in kind: the latter being imperceptible
to its victim, the former not so.

[Sidenote: 1151a] But, of the different forms of Imperfect Self-Control,
those are better who are carried off their feet by a sudden access of
temptation than they who have Reason but do not abide by it; these
last being overcome by passion less in degree, and not wholly without
premeditation as are the others: for the man of Imperfect Self-Control
is like those who are soon intoxicated and by little wine and less than
the common run of men. Well then, that Imperfection of Self-Control is
not Confirmed Viciousness is plain: and yet perhaps it is such in a way,
because in one sense it is contrary to moral choice and in another the
result of it: at all events, in respect of the actions, the case is much
like what Demodocus said of the Miletians. "The people of Miletus are
not fools, but they do just the kind of things that fools do;" and so
they of Imperfect Self-Control are not unjust, but they do unjust acts.

But to resume. Since the man of Imperfect Self-Control is of such a
character as to follow bodily pleasures in excess and in defiance of
Right Reason, without acting on any deliberate conviction, whereas the
man utterly destitute of Self-Control does act upon a conviction which
rests on his natural inclination to follow after these pleasures; the
former may be easily persuaded to a different course, but the latter
not: for Virtue and Vice respectively preserve and corrupt the moral
principle; now the motive is the principle or starting point in moral
actions, just as axioms and postulates are in mathematics: and neither
in morals nor mathematics is it Reason which is apt to teach the
principle; but Excellence, either natural or acquired by custom, in
holding right notions with respect to the principle. He who does this in
morals is the man of Perfected Self-Mastery, and the contrary character
is the man utterly destitute of Self-Control.

Again, there is a character liable to be taken off his feet in defiance
of Right Reason because of passion; whom passion so far masters as to
prevent his acting in accordance with Right Reason, but not so far as to
make him be convinced that it is his proper line to follow after such
pleasures without limit: this character is the man of Imperfect Self-
Control, better than he who is utterly destitute of it, and not a bad
man simply and without qualification: because in him the highest and
best part, i.e. principle, is preserved: and there is another character
opposed to him who is apt to abide by his resolutions, and not to depart
from them; at all events, not at the instigation of passion. It is
evident then from all this, that Self-Control is a good state and the
Imperfection of it a bad one.

Next comes the question, whether a man is a man of Self-Control for
abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be they of what kind they
may, or only by the right one; or again, a man of Imperfect Self-Control
for not abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be they of whatever
kind; or, to put the case we did before, is he such for not abiding by
false conclusions and wrong moral choice?

Is not this the truth, that _incidentally_ it is by conclusions and
moral choice of any kind that the one character abides and the other
does not, but _per se_ true conclusions and right moral choice: to
explain what is meant by incidentally, and _per se_; suppose a man
chooses or pursues this thing for the sake of that, he is said to pursue
and choose that _per se_, but this only incidentally. For the term _per
se_ we use commonly the word "simply," and so, in a way, it is opinion
of any kind soever by which the two characters respectively abide or
not, but he is "simply" entitled to the designations who abides or not
by the true opinion.

There are also people, who have a trick of abiding by their, own
opinions, who are commonly called Positive, as they who are hard to
be persuaded, and whose convictions are not easily changed: now these
people bear some resemblance to the character of Self-Control, just as
the prodigal to the liberal or the rash man to the brave, but they are
different in many points. The man of Self-Control does not change by
reason of passion and lust, yet when occasion so requires he will be
easy of persuasion: but the Positive man changes not at the call of
Reason, though many of this class take up certain desires and are led by
their pleasures. Among the class of Positive are the Opinionated, the
Ignorant, and the Bearish: the first, from the motives of pleasure and
pain: I mean, they have the pleasurable feeling of a kind of victory in
not having their convictions changed, and they are pained when their
decrees, so to speak, are reversed: so that, in fact, they rather
resemble the man of Imperfect Self-Control than the man of Self-Control.

Again, there are some who depart from their resolutions not by reason of
any Imperfection of Self-Control; take, for instance, Neoptolemus in the
Philoctetes of Sophocles. Here certainly pleasure was the motive of his
departure from his resolution, but then it was one of a noble sort:
for to be truthful was noble in his eyes and he had been persuaded by
Ulysses to lie.

So it is not every one who acts from the motive of pleasure who is
utterly destitute of Self-Control or base or of Imperfect Self-Control,
only he who acts from the impulse of a base pleasure.

Moreover as there is a character who takes less pleasure than he ought
in bodily enjoyments, and he also fails to abide by the conclusion of
his Reason, the man of Self-Control is the mean between him and the man
of Imperfect Self-Control: that is to say, the latter fails to abide by
them because of somewhat too much, the former because of somewhat too
little; while the man of Self-Control abides by them, and never changes
by reason of anything else than such conclusions.

Now of course since Self-Control is good both the contrary States must
be bad, as indeed they plainly are: but because the one of them is seen
in few persons, and but rarely in them, Self-Control comes to be
viewed as if opposed only to the Imperfection of it, just as
Perfected Self-Mastery is thought to be opposed only to utter want of
Self-Control.

[Sidenote: 1152a] Again, as many terms are used in the way of
similitude, so people have come to talk of the Self-Control of the man
of Perfected Self-Mastery in the way of similitude: for the man of
Self-Control and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery have this in common,
that they do nothing against Right Reason on the impulse of bodily
pleasures, but then the former has bad desires, the latter not; and the
latter is so constituted as not even to feel pleasure contrary to his
Reason, the former feels but does not yield to it. Like again are the
man of Imperfect Self-Control and he who is utterly destitute of it,
though in reality distinct: both follow bodily pleasures, but the latter
under a notion that it is the proper line for him to take, his former
without any such notion.



X

And it is not possible for the same man to be at once a man of Practical
Wisdom and of Imperfect Self-Control: because the character of Practical
Wisdom includes, as we showed before, goodness of moral character.
And again, it is not knowledge merely, but aptitude for action, which
constitutes Practical Wisdom: and of this aptitude the man of Imperfect
Self-Control is destitute. But there is no reason why the Clever man
should not be of Imperfect Self-Control: and the reason why some men are
occasionally thought to be men of Practical Wisdom, and yet of Imperfect
Self-Control, is this, that Cleverness differs from Practical Wisdom in
the way I stated in a former book, and is very near it so far as the
intellectual element is concerned but differs in respect of the moral
choice.

Nor is the man of Imperfect Self-Control like the man who both has and
calls into exercise his knowledge, but like the man who, having it, is
overpowered by sleep or wine. Again, he acts voluntarily (because he
knows, in a certain sense, what he does and the result of it), but he is
not a confirmed bad man, for his moral choice is good, so he is at all
events only half bad. Nor is he unjust, because he does not act with
deliberate intent: for of the two chief forms of the character, the one
is not apt to abide by his deliberate resolutions, and the other, the
man of constitutional strength of passion, is not apt to deliberate at
all.

So in fact the man of Imperfect Self-Control is like a community which
makes all proper enactments, and has admirable laws, only does not act
on them, verifying the scoff of Anaxandrides,

  "That State did will it, which cares nought for laws;"
whereas the bad man is like one which acts upon its laws, but then
unfortunately they are bad ones. Imperfection of Self-Control and
Self-Control, after all, are above the average state of men; because he
of the latter character is more true to his Reason, and the former less
so, than is in the power of most men.

Again, of the two forms of Imperfect Self-Control that is more easily
cured which they have who are constitutionally of strong passions, than
that of those who form resolutions and break them; and they that are so
through habituation than they that are so naturally; since of course
custom is easier to change than nature, because the very resemblance of
custom to nature is what constitutes the difficulty of changing it; as
Evenus says,

  "Practice, I say, my friend, doth long endure,
  And at the last is even very nature."

We have now said then what Self-Control is, what Imperfection of
Self-Control, what Endurance, and what Softness, and how these states
are mutually related.

XI

[Sidenote: II52b]

To consider the subject of Pleasure and Pain falls within the province
of the Social-Science Philosopher, since he it is who has to fix the
Master-End which is to guide us in dominating any object absolutely evil
or good.

But we may say more: an inquiry into their nature is absolutely
necessary. First, because we maintained that Moral Virtue and Moral Vice
are both concerned with Pains and Pleasures: next, because the greater
part of mankind assert that Happiness must include Pleasure (which by
the way accounts for the word they use, makarioz; chaireiu being the
root of that word).

Now some hold that no one Pleasure is good, either in itself or as a
matter of result, because Good and Pleasure are not identical. Others
that some Pleasures are good but the greater number bad. There is yet a
third view; granting that every Pleasure is good, still the Chief Good
cannot possibly be Pleasure.

In support of the first opinion (that Pleasure is utterly not-good) it
is urged that:

I. Every Pleasure is a sensible process towards a complete state; but
no such process is akin to the end to be attained: _e.g._ no process of
building to the completed house.

2. The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures.

3. The man of Practical Wisdom aims at avoiding Pain, not at attaining
Pleasure.

4. Pleasures are an impediment to thought, and the more so the more
keenly they are felt. An obvious instance will readily occur.

5. Pleasure cannot be referred to any Art: and yet every good is the
result of some Art.

6. Children and brutes pursue Pleasures.

In support of the second (that not all Pleasures are good), That there
are some base and matter of reproach, and some even hurtful: because
some things that are pleasant produce disease.

In support of the third (that Pleasure is not the Chief Good), That it
is not an End but a process towards creating an End.

This is, I think, a fair account of current views on the matter.

XII


But that the reasons alleged do not prove it either to be not-good or
the Chief Good is plain from the following considerations.

First. Good being either absolute or relative, of course the natures and
states embodying it will be so too; therefore also the movements and the
processes of creation. So, of those which are thought to be bad
some will be bad absolutely, but relatively not bad, perhaps even
choiceworthy; some not even choiceworthy relatively to any particular
person, only at certain times or for a short time but not in themselves
choiceworthy.

Others again are not even Pleasures at all though they produce that
impression on the mind: all such I mean as imply pain and whose purpose
is cure; those of sick people, for instance.

Next, since Good may be either an active working or a state, those
[Greek: _kinaeseis_ or _geneseis_] which tend to place us in our natural
state are pleasant incidentally because of that *[Sidenote: 1153a]
tendency: but the active working is really in the desires excited in the
remaining (sound) part of our state or nature: for there are Pleasures
which have no connection with pain or desire: the acts of contemplative
intellect, for instance, in which case there is no deficiency in the
nature or state of him who performs the acts.

A proof of this is that the same pleasant thing does not produce the
sensation of Pleasure when the natural state is being filled up or
completed as when it is already in its normal condition: in this latter
case what give the sensation are things pleasant _per se_, in the former
even those things which are contrary. I mean, you find people taking
pleasure in sharp or bitter things of which no one is naturally or in
itself pleasant; of course not therefore the Pleasures arising from
them, because it is obvious that as is the classification of pleasant
things such must be that of the Pleasures arising from them.

Next, it does not follow that there must be something else better than
any given pleasure because (as some say) the End must be better than
the process which creates it. For it is not true that all Pleasures
are processes or even attended by any process, but (some are) active
workings or even Ends: in fact they result not from our coming to be
something but from our using our powers. Again, it is not true that the
End is, in every case, distinct from the process: it is true only in
the case of such processes as conduce to the perfecting of the natural
state.

For which reason it is wrong to say that Pleasure is "a sensible process
of production." For "process etc." should be substituted "active working
of the natural state," for "sensible" "unimpeded." The reason of its
being thought to be a "process etc." is that it is good in the highest
sense: people confusing "active working" and "process," whereas they
really are distinct.

Next, as to the argument that there are bad Pleasures because some
things which are pleasant are also hurtful to health, it is the same as
saying that some healthful things are bad for "business." In this sense,
of course, both may be said to be bad, but then this does not make
them out to be bad _simpliciter_: the exercise of the pure Intellect
sometimes hurts a man's health: but what hinders Practical Wisdom or
any state whatever is, not the Pleasure peculiar to, but some Pleasure
foreign to it: the Pleasures arising from the exercise of the pure
Intellect or from learning only promote each.

Next. "No Pleasure is the work of any Art." What else would you expect?
No active working is the work of any Art, only the faculty of so
working. Still the perfumer's Art or the cook's are thought to belong to
Pleasure.

Next. "The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures." "The man
of Practical Wisdom aims at escaping Pain rather than at attaining
Pleasure."

"Children and brutes pursue Pleasures."

One answer will do for all.

We have already said in what sense all Pleasures are good _per se_ and
in what sense not all are good: it is the latter class that brutes and
children pursue, such as are accompanied by desire and pain, that is the
bodily Pleasures (which answer to this description) and the excesses of
them: in short, those in respect of which the man utterly destitute of
Self-Control is thus utterly destitute. And it is the absence of the
pain arising from these Pleasures that the man of Practical Wisdom
aims at. It follows that these Pleasures are what the man of Perfected
Self-Mastery avoids: for obviously he has Pleasures peculiarly his own.

[Sidenote: XIII 1153_b_] Then again, it is allowed that Pain is an evil
and a thing to be avoided partly as bad _per se_, partly as being a
hindrance in some particular way. Now the contrary of that which is to
be avoided, _quâ_ it is to be avoided, _i.e._ evil, is good. Pleasure
then must be _a_ good.

The attempted answer of Speusippus, "that Pleasure may be opposed and
yet not contrary to Pain, just as the greater portion of any magnitude
is contrary to the less but only opposed to the exact half," will not
hold: for he cannot say that Pleasure is identical with evil of any
kind. Again. Granting that some Pleasures are low, there is no reason
why some particular Pleasure may not be very good, just as some
particular Science may be although there are some which are low.

Perhaps it even follows, since each state may have active working
unimpeded, whether the active workings of all be Happiness or that of
some one of them, that this active working, if it be unimpeded, must be
choiceworthy: now Pleasure is exactly this. So that the Chief Good may
be Pleasure of some kind, though most Pleasures be (let us assume) low
_per se_.

And for this reason all men think the happy life is pleasant, and
interweave Pleasure with Happiness. Reasonably enough: because Happiness
is perfect, but no impeded active working is perfect; and therefore
the happy man needs as an addition the goods of the body and the goods
external and fortune that in these points he may not be fettered. As for
those who say that he who is being tortured on the wheel, or falls into
great misfortunes is happy provided only he be good, they talk nonsense,
whether they mean to do so or not. On the other hand, because fortune
is needed as an addition, some hold good fortune to be identical with
Happiness: which it is not, for even this in excess is a hindrance, and
perhaps then has no right to be called good fortune since it is good
only in so far as it contributes to Happiness.

The fact that all animals, brute and human alike, pursue Pleasure, is
some presumption of its being in a sense the Chief Good;

("There must be something in what most folks say,") only as one and
the same nature or state neither is nor is thought to be the best, so
neither do all pursue the same Pleasure, Pleasure nevertheless all do.
Nay further, what they pursue is, perhaps, not what they think nor what
they would say they pursue, but really one and the same: for in all
there is some instinct above themselves. But the bodily Pleasures have
received the name exclusively, because theirs is the most frequent form
and that which is universally partaken of; and so, because to many these
alone are known they believe them to be the only ones which exist.

[Sidenote: II54a]

It is plain too that, unless Pleasure and its active working be good, it
will not be true that the happy man's life embodies Pleasure: for why
will he want it on the supposition that it is not good and that he can
live even with Pain? because, assuming that Pleasure is not good, then
Pain is neither evil nor good, and so why should he avoid it?

Besides, the life of the good man is not more pleasurable than any other
unless it be granted that his active workings are so too.

XIV

Some inquiry into the bodily Pleasures is also necessary for those who
say that some Pleasures, to be sure, are highly choiceworthy (the good
ones to wit), but not the bodily Pleasures; that is, those which are the
object-matter of the man utterly destitute of Self-Control.

If so, we ask, why are the contrary Pains bad? they cannot be (on their
assumption) because the contrary of bad is good.

May we not say that the necessary bodily Pleasures are good in the sense
in which that which is not-bad is good? or that they are good only up
to a certain point? because such states or movements as cannot have too
much of the better cannot have too much of Pleasure, but those which can
of the former can also of the latter. Now the bodily Pleasures do admit
of excess: in fact the low bad man is such because he pursues the excess
of them instead of those which are necessary (meat, drink, and the
objects of other animal appetites do give pleasure to all, but not in
right manner or degree to all). But his relation to Pain is exactly the
contrary: it is not excessive Pain, but Pain at all, that he avoids
[which makes him to be in this way too a bad low man], because only
in the case of him who pursues excessive Pleasure is Pain contrary to
excessive Pleasure.

It is not enough however merely to state the truth, we should also show
how the false view arises; because this strengthens conviction. I mean,
when we have given a probable reason why that impresses people as true
which really is not true, it gives them a stronger conviction of the
truth. And so we must now explain why the bodily Pleasures appear to
people to be more choiceworthy than any others.

The first obvious reason is, that bodily Pleasure drives out Pain; and
because Pain is felt in excess men pursue Pleasure in excess, _i.e._
generally bodily Pleasure, under the notion of its being a remedy for
that Pain. These remedies, moreover, come to be violent ones; which is
the very reason they are pursued, since the impression they produce
on the mind is owing to their being looked at side by side with their
contrary.

And, as has been said before, there are the two following reasons why
bodily Pleasure is thought to be not-good.

1. Some Pleasures of this class are actings of a low nature, whether
congenital as in brutes, or acquired by custom as in low bad men.

2. Others are in the nature of cures, cures that is of some deficiency;
now of course it is better to have [the healthy state] originally than
that it should accrue afterwards.

[Sidenote: 1154b] But some Pleasures result when natural states are
being perfected: these therefore are good as a matter of result.

Again, the very fact of their being violent causes them to be pursued by
such as can relish no others: such men in fact create violent thirsts
for themselves (if harmless ones then we find no fault, if harmful then
it is bad and low) because they have no other things to take
pleasure in, and the neutral state is distasteful to some people
constitutionally; for toil of some kind is inseparable from life, as
physiologists testify, telling us that the acts of seeing or hearing are
painful, only that we are used to the pain and do not find it out.

Similarly in youth the constant growth produces a state much like
that of vinous intoxication, and youth is pleasant. Again, men of the
melancholic temperament constantly need some remedial process (because
the body, from its temperament, is constantly being worried), and they
are in a chronic state of violent desire. But Pleasure drives out Pain;
not only such Pleasure as is directly contrary to Pain but even any
Pleasure provided it be strong: and this is how men come to be utterly
destitute of Self-Mastery, _i.e._ low and bad.

But those Pleasures which are unconnected with Pains do not admit of
excess: _i.e._ such as belong to objects which are naturally pleasant
and not merely as a matter of result: by the latter class I mean such
as are remedial, and the reason why these are thought to be pleasant is
that the cure results from the action in some way of that part of the
constitution which remains sound. By "pleasant naturally" I mean such as
put into action a nature which is pleasant.

The reason why no one and the same thing is invariably pleasant is that
our nature is, not simple, but complex, involving something different
from itself (so far as we are corruptible beings). Suppose then that one
part of this nature be doing something, this something is, to the other
part, unnatural: but, if there be an equilibrium of the two natures,
then whatever is being done is indifferent. It is obvious that if there
be any whose nature is simple and not complex, to such a being the same
course of acting will always be the most pleasurable.

For this reason it is that the Divinity feels Pleasure which is always
one, _i.e._ simple: not motion merely but also motionlessness acts, and
Pleasure resides rather in the absence than in the presence of motion.

The reason why the Poet's dictum "change is of all things most pleasant"
is true, is "a baseness in our blood;" for as the bad man is easily
changeable, bad must be also the nature that craves change, _i.e._ it is
neither simple nor good.

We have now said our say about Self-Control and its opposite; and about
Pleasure and Pain. What each is, and how the one set is good the other
bad. We have yet to speak of Friendship.




BOOK VIII

[Sidenote: I 1155_a_] Next would seem properly to follow a dissertation
on Friendship: because, in the first place, it is either itself a virtue
or connected with virtue; and next it is a thing most necessary for
life, since no one would choose to live without friends though he should
have all the other good things in the world: and, in fact, men who are
rich or possessed of authority and influence are thought to have special
need of friends: for where is the use of such prosperity if there be
taken away the doing of kindnesses of which friends are the most usual
and most commendable objects? Or how can it be kept or preserved without
friends? because the greater it is so much the more slippery and
hazardous: in poverty moreover and all other adversities men think
friends to be their only refuge.

Furthermore, Friendship helps the young to keep from error: the old, in
respect of attention and such deficiencies in action as their weakness
makes them liable to; and those who are in their prime, in respect of
noble deeds ("They _two_ together going," Homer says, you may remember),
because they are thus more able to devise plans and carry them out.

Again, it seems to be implanted in us by Nature: as, for instance, in
the parent towards the offspring and the offspring towards the parent
(not merely in the human species, but likewise in birds and most
animals), and in those of the same tribe towards one another, and
specially in men of the same nation; for which reason we commend those
men who love their fellows: and one may see in the course of travel how
close of kin and how friendly man is to man.

Furthermore, Friendship seems to be the bond of Social Communities, and
legislators seem to be more anxious to secure it than Justice even. I
mean, Unanimity is somewhat like to Friendship, and this they certainly
aim at and specially drive out faction as being inimical.

Again, where people are in Friendship Justice is not required; but, on
the other hand, though they are just they need Friendship in addition,
and that principle which is most truly just is thought to partake of the
nature of Friendship.

Lastly, not only is it a thing necessary but honourable likewise: since
we praise those who are fond of friends, and the having numerous friends
is thought a matter of credit to a man; some go so far as to hold, that
"good man" and "friend" are terms synonymous.

Yet the disputed points respecting it are not few: some men lay down
that it is a kind of resemblance, and that men who are like one another
are friends: whence come the common sayings, "Like will to like," "Birds
of a feather," and so on. Others, on the contrary, say, that all such
come under the maxim, "Two of a trade never agree."

[Sidenote: 1155b] Again, some men push their inquiries on these points
higher and reason physically: as Euripides, who says,

  "The earth by drought consumed doth love the rain,
  And the great heaven, overcharged with rain,
  Doth love to fall in showers upon the earth."

Heraclitus, again, maintains, that "contrariety is expedient, and that
the best agreement arises from things differing, and that all things
come into being in the way of the principle of antagonism."

Empedocles, among others, in direct opposition to these, affirms, that
"like aims at like."

These physical questions we will take leave to omit, inasmuch as they
are foreign to the present inquiry; and we will examine such as are
proper to man and concern moral characters and feelings: as, for
instance, "Does Friendship arise among all without distinction, or is it
impossible for bad men to be friends?" and, "Is there but one species of
Friendship, or several?" for they who ground the opinion that there is
but one on the fact that Friendship admits of degrees hold that upon
insufficient proof; because things which are different in species admit
likewise of degrees (on this point we have spoken before).


II

Our view will soon be cleared on these points when we have ascertained
what is properly the object-matter of Friendship: for it is thought that
not everything indiscriminately, but some peculiar matter alone, is the
object of this affection; that is to say, what is good, or pleasurable,
or useful. Now it would seem that that is useful through which accrues
any good or pleasure, and so the objects of Friendship, as absolute
Ends, are the good and the pleasurable.

A question here arises; whether it is good absolutely or that which is
good to the individuals, for which men feel Friendship (these two being
sometimes distinct): and similarly in respect of the pleasurable. It
seems then that each individual feels it towards that which is good to
himself, and that abstractedly it is the real good which is the object
of Friendship, and to each individual that which is good to each. It
comes then to this; that each individual feels Friendship not for what
_is_ but for that which _conveys to his mind the impression of being_
good to himself. But this will make no real difference, because that
which is truly the object of Friendship will also convey this impression
to the mind.

There are then three causes from which men feel Friendship: but the term
is not applied to the case of fondness for things inanimate because
there is no requital of the affection nor desire for the good of those
objects: it certainly savours of the ridiculous to say that a man fond
of wine wishes well to it: the only sense in which it is true being that
he wishes it to be kept safe and sound for his own use and benefit. But
to the friend they say one should wish all good for his sake. And when
men do thus wish good to another (he not *[Sidenote: 1156a]
reciprocating the feeling), people call them Kindly; because Friendship
they describe as being "Kindliness between persons who reciprocate it."
But must they not add that the feeling must be mutually known? for many
men are kindly disposed towards those whom they have never seen but whom
they conceive to be amiable or useful: and this notion amounts to the
same thing as a real feeling between them.

Well, these are plainly Kindly-disposed towards one another: but how can
one call them friends while their mutual feelings are unknown to one
another? to complete the idea of Friendship, then, it is requisite that
they have kindly feelings towards one another, and wish one another good
from one of the aforementioned causes, and that these kindly feelings
should be mutually known.

III


As the motives to Friendship differ in kind so do the respective
feelings and Friendships. The species then of Friendship are three, in
number equal to the objects of it, since in the line of each there may
be "mutual affection mutually known."

Now they who have Friendship for one another desire one another's good
according to the motive of their Friendship; accordingly they whose
motive is utility have no Friendship for one another really, but only in
so far as some good arises to them from one another.

And they whose motive is pleasure are in like case: I mean, they have
Friendship for men of easy pleasantry, not because they are of a given
character but because they are pleasant to themselves. So then they
whose motive to Friendship is utility love their friends for what is
good to themselves; they whose motive is pleasure do so for what is
pleasurable to themselves; that is to say, not in so far as the friend
beloved _is_ but in so far as he is useful or pleasurable. These
Friendships then are a matter of result: since the object is not beloved
in that he is the man he is but in that he furnishes advantage or
pleasure as the case may be. Such Friendships are of course very liable
to dissolution if the parties do not continue alike: I mean, that the
others cease to have any Friendship for them when they are no longer
pleasurable or useful. Now it is the nature of utility not to be
permanent but constantly varying: so, of course, when the motive which
made them friends is vanished, the Friendship likewise dissolves; since
it existed only relatively to those circumstances.

Friendship of this kind is thought to exist principally among the old
(because men at that time of life pursue not what is pleasurable but
what is profitable); and in such, of men in their prime and of the
young, as are given to the pursuit of profit. They that are such have no
intimate intercourse with one another; for sometimes they are not
even pleasurable to one another; nor, in fact, do they desire such
intercourse unless their friends are profitable to them, because they
are pleasurable only in so far as they have hopes of advantage. With
these Friendships is commonly ranked that of hospitality.

But the Friendship of the young is thought to be based on the motive
of pleasure: because they live at the beck and call of passion and
generally pursue what is pleasurable to themselves and the object of the
present moment: and as their age changes so likewise do their pleasures.

This is the reason why they form and dissolve Friendships rapidly: since
the Friendship changes with the pleasurable object and such pleasure
changes quickly.

[Sidenote: 1156b] The young are also much given up to Love; this passion
being, in great measure, a matter of impulse and based on pleasure: for
which cause they conceive Friendships and quickly drop them, changing
often in the same day: but these wish for society and intimate
intercourse with their friends, since they thus attain the object of
their Friendship.

That then is perfect Friendship which subsists between those who are
good and whose similarity consists in their goodness: for these men wish
one another's good in similar ways; in so far as they are good (and good
they are in themselves); and those are specially friends who wish good
to their friends for their sakes, because they feel thus towards them on
their own account and not as a mere matter of result; so the Friendship
between these men continues to subsist so long as they are good; and
goodness, we know, has in it a principle of permanence.

Moreover, each party is good abstractedly and also relatively to his
friend, for all good men are not only abstractedly good but also useful
to one another. Such friends are also mutually pleasurable because
all good men are so abstractedly, and also relatively to one another,
inasmuch as to each individual those actions are pleasurable which
correspond to his nature, and all such as are like them. Now when men
are good these will be always the same, or at least similar.

Friendship then under these circumstances is permanent, as we should
reasonably expect, since it combines in itself all the requisite
qualifications of friends. I mean, that Friendship of whatever kind is
based upon good or pleasure (either abstractedly or relatively to the
person entertaining the sentiment of Friendship), and results from a
similarity of some sort; and to this kind belong all the aforementioned
requisites in the parties themselves, because in this the parties are
similar, and so on: moreover, in it there is the abstractedly good and
the abstractedly pleasant, and as these are specially the object-matter
of Friendship so the feeling and the state of Friendship is found most
intense and most excellent in men thus qualified.

Rare it is probable Friendships of this kind will be, because men
of this kind are rare. Besides, all requisite qualifications being
presupposed, there is further required time and intimacy: for, as the
proverb says, men cannot know one another "till they have eaten the
requisite quantity of salt together;" nor can they in fact admit one
another to intimacy, much less be friends, till each has appeared to
the other and been proved to be a fit object of Friendship. They who
speedily commence an interchange of friendly actions may be said to wish
to be friends, but they are not so unless they are also proper objects
of Friendship and mutually known to be such: that is to say, a desire
for Friendship may arise quickly but not Friendship itself.


IV

Well, this Friendship is perfect both in respect of the time and in all
other points; and exactly the same and similar results accrue to each
party from the other; which ought to be the case between friends.

[Sidenote: II57a] The friendship based upon the pleasurable is, so to
say, a copy of this, since the good are sources of pleasure to one
another: and that based on utility likewise, the good being also
useful to one another. Between men thus connected Friendships are
most permanent when the same result accrues to both from one another,
pleasure, for instance; and not merely so but from the same source, as
in the case of two men of easy pleasantry; and not as it is in that of a
lover and the object of his affection, these not deriving their pleasure
from the same causes, but the former from seeing the latter and the
latter from receiving the attentions of the former: and when the bloom
of youth fades the Friendship sometimes ceases also, because then the
lover derives no pleasure from seeing and the object of his affection
ceases to receive the attentions which were paid before: in many cases,
however, people so connected continue friends, if being of similar
tempers they have come from custom to like one another's disposition.

Where people do not interchange pleasure but profit in matters of Love,
the Friendship is both less intense in degree and also less permanent:
in fact, they who are friends because of advantage commonly part when
the advantage ceases; for, in reality, they never were friends of one
another but of the advantage.

So then it appears that from motives of pleasure or profit bad men may
be friends to one another, or good men to bad men or men of neutral
character to one of any character whatever: but disinterestedly, for the
sake of one another, plainly the good alone can be friends; because
bad men have no pleasure even in themselves unless in so far as some
advantage arises.

And further, the Friendship of the good is alone superior to calumny;
it not being easy for men to believe a third person respecting one
whom they have long tried and proved: there is between good men mutual
confidence, and the feeling that one's friend would never have done one
wrong, and all other such things as are expected in Friendship really
worthy the name; but in the other kinds there is nothing to prevent all
such suspicions.

I call them Friendships, because since men commonly give the name of
friends to those who are connected from motives of profit (which is
justified by political language, for alliances between states are
thought to be contracted with a view to advantage), and to those who are
attached to one another by the motive of pleasure (as children are), we
may perhaps also be allowed to call such persons friends, and say there
are several species of Friendship; primarily and specially that of
the good, in that they are good, and the rest only in the way of
resemblance: I mean, people connected otherwise are friends in that way
in which there arises to them somewhat good and some mutual resemblance
(because, we must remember the pleasurable is good to those who are fond
of it).

These secondary Friendships, however, do not combine very well; that is
to say, the same persons do not become friends by reason of advantage
and by reason of the pleasurable, for these matters of result are not
often combined. And Friendship having been divided into these kinds, bad
[Sidenote: _1157b_] men will be friends by reason of pleasure or profit,
this being their point of resemblance; while the good are friends for
one another's sake, that is, in so far as they are good.

These last may be termed abstractedly and simply friends, the former as
a matter of result and termed friends from their resemblance to these
last.


V

Further; just as in respect of the different virtues some men are termed
good in respect of a certain inward state, others in respect of acts
of working, so is it in respect of Friendship: I mean, they who live
together take pleasure in, and impart good to, one another: but they who
are asleep or are locally separated do not perform acts, but only are in
such a state as to act in a friendly way if they acted at all: distance
has in itself no direct effect upon Friendship, but only prevents the
acting it out: yet, if the absence be protracted, it is thought to cause
a forgetfulness even of the Friendship: and hence it has been said,
"many and many a Friendship doth want of intercourse destroy."

Accordingly, neither the old nor the morose appear to be calculated for
Friendship, because the pleasurableness in them is small, and no one can
spend his days in company with that which is positively painful or even
not pleasurable; since to avoid the painful and aim at the pleasurable
is one of the most obvious tendencies of human nature. They who get on
with one another very fairly, but are not in habits of intimacy, are
rather like people having kindly feelings towards one another than
friends; nothing being so characteristic of friends as the living with
one another, because the necessitous desire assistance, and the happy
companionship, they being the last persons in the world for solitary
existence: but people cannot spend their time together unless they are
mutually pleasurable and take pleasure in the same objects, a quality
which is thought to appertain to the Friendship of companionship.

The connection then subsisting between the good is Friendship _par
excellence_, as has already been frequently said: since that which is
abstractedly good or pleasant is thought to be an object of Friendship
and choiceworthy, and to each individual whatever is such to him;
and the good man to the good man for both these reasons. (Now the
entertaining the sentiment is like a feeling, but Friendship itself
like a state: because the former may have for its object even things
inanimate, but requital of Friendship is attended with moral choice
which proceeds from a moral state: and again, men wish good to the
objects of their Friendship for their sakes, not in the way of a mere
feeling but of moral state.).

And the good, in loving their friend, love their own good (inasmuch as
the good man, when brought into that relation, becomes a good to him
with whom he is so connected), so that either party loves his own
good, and repays his friend equally both in wishing well and in the
pleasurable: for equality is said to be a tie of Friendship. Well, these
points belong most to the Friendship between good men.

But between morose or elderly men Friendship is less apt to arise,
because they are somewhat awkward-tempered, and take less pleasure in
intercourse and society; these being thought to be specially friendly
and productive of Friendship: and so young men become friends quickly,
old men not so (because people do not become friends with any, unless
they take pleasure in them); and in like manner neither do the morose.
Yet men of these classes entertain kindly feelings towards one another:
they wish good to one another and render mutual assistance in respect of
their needs, but they are not quite friends, because they neither
spend their time together nor take pleasure in one another, which
circumstances are thought specially to belong to Friendship.

To be a friend to many people, in the way of the perfect Friendship, is
not possible; just as you cannot be in love with many at once: it is,
so to speak, a state of excess which naturally has but one object; and
besides, it is not an easy thing for one man to be very much pleased
with many people at the same time, nor perhaps to find many really good.
Again, a man needs experience, and to be in habits of close intimacy,
which is very difficult.

But it _is_ possible to please many on the score of advantage and
pleasure: because there are many men of the kind, and the services may
be rendered in a very short time.

Of the two imperfect kinds that which most resembles the perfect is the
Friendship based upon pleasure, in which the same results accrue from
both and they take pleasure in one another or in the same objects; such
as are the Friendships of the young, because a generous spirit is most
found in these. The Friendship because of advantage is the connecting
link of shopkeepers.

Then again, the very happy have no need of persons who are profitable,
but of pleasant ones they have because they wish to have people to live
intimately with; and what is painful they bear for a short time indeed,
but continuously no one could support it, nay, not even the Chief Good
itself, if it were painful to him individually: and so they look out for
pleasant friends: perhaps they ought to require such to be good also;
and good moreover to themselves individually, because then they will
have all the proper requisites of Friendship.

Men in power are often seen to make use of several distinct friends:
for some are useful to them and others pleasurable, but the two are not
often united: because they do not, in fact, seek such as shall combine
pleasantness and goodness, nor such as shall be useful for honourable
purposes: but with a view to attain what is pleasant they look out for
men of easy-pleasantry; and again, for men who are clever at executing
any business put into their hands: and these qualifications are not
commonly found united in the same man.

It has been already stated that the good man unites the qualities of
pleasantness and usefulness: but then such a one will not be a friend to
a superior unless he be also his superior in goodness: for if this be
not the case, he cannot, being surpassed in one point, make things
equal by a proportionate degree of Friendship. And characters who unite
superiority of station and goodness are not common. Now all the kinds
of Friendship which have been already mentioned exist in a state of
equality, inasmuch as either the same results accrue to both and they
wish the same things to one another, or else they barter one thing
against another; pleasure, for instance, against profit: it has been
said already that Friendships of this latter kind are less intense in
degree and less permanent.

And it is their resemblance or dissimilarity to the same thing which
makes them to be thought to be and not to be Friendships: they show like
Friendships in right of their likeness to that which is based on virtue
(the one kind having the pleasurable, the other the profitable, both
of which belong also to the other); and again, they do not show like
Friendships by reason of their unlikeness to that true kind; which
unlikeness consists herein, that while that is above calumny and so
permanent these quickly change and differ in many other points.


VII

But there is another form of Friendship, that, namely, in which the one
party is superior to the other; as between father and son, elder and
younger, husband and wife, ruler and ruled. These also differ one from
another: I mean, the Friendship between parents and children is not the
same as between ruler and the ruled, nor has the father the same towards
the son as the son towards the father, nor the husband towards the wife
as she towards him; because the work, and therefore the excellence, of
each of these is different, and different therefore are the causes of
their feeling Friendship; distinct and different therefore are their
feelings and states of Friendship.

And the same results do not accrue to each from the other, nor in fact
ought they to be looked for: but, when children render to their parents
what they ought to the authors of their being, and parents to their sons
what they ought to their offspring, the Friendship between such parties
will be permanent and equitable.

Further; the feeling of Friendship should be in a due proportion in all
Friendships which are between superior and inferior; I mean, the better
man, or the more profitable, and so forth, should be the object of a
stronger feeling than he himself entertains, because when the feeling of
Friendship comes to be after a certain rate then equality in a certain
sense is produced, which is thought to be a requisite in Friendship.

(It must be remembered, however, that the equal is not in the same case
as regards Justice and Friendship: for in strict Justice the exactly
proportioned equal ranks first, and the actual numerically equal ranks
second, while in Friendship this is exactly reversed.)

[Sidenote: 1159a] And that equality is thus requisite is plainly shown
by the occurrence of a great difference of goodness or badness, or
prosperity, or something else: for in this case, people are not any
longer friends, nay they do not even feel that they ought to be. The
clearest illustration is perhaps the case of the gods, because they are
most superior in all good things. It is obvious too, in the case of
kings, for they who are greatly their inferiors do not feel entitled to
be friends to them; nor do people very insignificant to be friends to
those of very high excellence or wisdom. Of course, in such cases it
is out of the question to attempt to define up to what point they may
continue friends: for you may remove many points of agreement and the
Friendship last nevertheless; but when one of the parties is very far
separated (as a god from men), it cannot continue any longer.

This has given room for a doubt, whether friends do really wish to their
friends the very highest goods, as that they may be gods: because, in
case the wish were accomplished, they would no longer have them for
friends, nor in fact would they have the good things they had, because
friends are good things. If then it has been rightly said that a friend
wishes to his friend good things for that friend's sake, it must be
understood that he is to remain such as he now is: that is to say, he
will wish the greatest good to him of which as man he is capable: yet
perhaps not all, because each man desires good for himself most of all.

VIII

It is thought that desire for honour makes the mass of men wish rather
to be the objects of the feeling of Friendship than to entertain it
themselves (and for this reason they are fond of flatterers, a flatterer
being a friend inferior or at least pretending to be such and rather to
entertain towards another the feeling of Friendship than to be himself
the object of it), since the former is thought to be nearly the same as
being honoured, which the mass of men desire. And yet men seem to choose
honour, not for its own sake, but incidentally: I mean, the common run
of men delight to be honoured by those in power because of the hope it
raises; that is they think they shall get from them anything they may
happen to be in want of, so they delight in honour as an earnest of
future benefit. They again who grasp at honour at the hands of the good
and those who are really acquainted with their merits desire to confirm
their own opinion about themselves: so they take pleasure in the
conviction that they are good, which is based on the sentence of those
who assert it. But in being the objects of Friendship men delight for
its own sake, and so this may be judged to be higher than being honoured
and Friendship to be in itself choiceworthy. Friendship, moreover, is
thought to consist in feeling, rather than being the object of, the
sentiment of Friendship, which is proved by the delight mothers have in
the feeling: some there are who give their children to be adopted and
brought up by others, and knowing them bear this feeling towards them
never seeking to have it returned, if both are not possible; but seeming
to be content with seeing them well off and bearing this feeling
themselves towards them, even though they, by reason of ignorance, never
render to them any filial regard or love.

Since then Friendship stands rather in the entertaining, than in being
the object of, the sentiment, and they are praised who are fond of their
friends, it seems that entertaining--*[Sidenote: II59b]the sentiment is
the Excellence of friends; and so, in whomsoever this exists in due
proportion these are stable friends and their Friendship is permanent.
And in this way may they who are unequal best be friends, because they
may thus be made equal.

Equality, then, and similarity are a tie to Friendship, and specially
the similarity of goodness, because good men, being stable in
themselves, are also stable as regards others, and neither ask degrading
services nor render them, but, so to say, rather prevent them: for it is
the part of the good neither to do wrong themselves nor to allow their
friends in so doing.

The bad, on the contrary, have no principle of stability: in fact, they
do not even continue like themselves: only they come to be friends for
a short time from taking delight in one another's wickedness. Those
connected by motives of profit, or pleasure, hold together somewhat
longer: so long, that is to say, as they can give pleasure or profit
mutually.

The Friendship based on motives of profit is thought to be most of all
formed out of contrary elements: the poor man, for instance, is thus a
friend of the rich, and the ignorant of the man of information; that
is to say, a man desiring that of which he is, as it happens, in want,
gives something else in exchange for it. To this same class we may refer
the lover and beloved, the beautiful and the ill-favoured. For this
reason lovers sometimes show in a ridiculous light by claiming to be the
objects of as intense a feeling as they themselves entertain: of course
if they are equally fit objects of Friendship they are perhaps entitled
to claim this, but if they have nothing of the kind it is ridiculous.

Perhaps, moreover, the contrary does not aim at its contrary for its own
sake but incidentally: the mean is really what is grasped at; it being
good for the dry, for instance, not to become wet but to attain the
mean, and so of the hot, etc. However, let us drop these questions,
because they are in fact somewhat foreign to our purpose.

IX

It seems too, as was stated at the commencement, that Friendship and
Justice have the same object-matter, and subsist between the same
persons: I mean that in every Communion there is thought to be some
principle of Justice and also some Friendship: men address as friends,
for instance, those who are their comrades by sea, or in war, and in
like manner also those who are brought into Communion with them in other
ways: and the Friendship, because also the Justice, is co-extensive with
the Communion, This justifies the common proverb, "the goods of friends
are common," since Friendship rests upon Communion.

[1160a] Now brothers and intimate companions have all in common, but
other people have their property separate, and some have more in common
and others less, because the Friendships likewise differ in degree. So
too do the various principles of Justice involved, not being the same
between parents and children as between brothers, nor between companions
as between fellow-citizens merely, and so on of all the other
conceivable Friendships. Different also are the principles of Injustice
as regards these different grades, and the acts become intensified by
being done to friends; for instance, it is worse to rob your companion
than one who is merely a fellow-citizen; to refuse help to a brother
than to a stranger; and to strike your father than any one else. So then
the Justice naturally increases with the degree of Friendship, as being
between the same parties and of equal extent.

All cases of Communion are parts, so to say, of the great Social one,
since in them men associate with a view to some advantage and to procure
some of those things which are needful for life; and the great Social
Communion is thought originally to have been associated and to
continue for the sake of some advantage: this being the point at which
legislators aim, affirming that to be just which is generally expedient.
All the other cases of Communion aim at advantage in particular points;
the crew of a vessel at that which is to result from the voyage which is
undertaken with a view to making money, or some such object; comrades in
war at that which is to result from the war, grasping either at wealth
or victory, or it may be a political position; and those of the same
tribe, or Demus, in like manner.

Some of them are thought to be formed for pleasure's sake, those, for
instance, of bacchanals or club-fellows, which are with a view to
Sacrifice or merely company. But all these seem to be ranged under
the great Social one, inasmuch as the aim of this is, not merely the
expediency of the moment but, for life and at all times; with a view
to which the members of it institute sacrifices and their attendant
assemblies, to render honour to the gods and procure for themselves
respite from toil combined with pleasure. For it appears that
sacrifices and religious assemblies in old times were made as a kind of
first-fruits after the ingathering of the crops, because at such seasons
they had most leisure.

So then it appears that all the instances of Communion are parts of the
great Social one: and corresponding Friendships will follow upon such
Communions.


X

Of Political Constitutions there are three kinds; and equal in number
are the deflections from them, being, so to say, corruptions of them.

The former are Kingship, Aristocracy, and that which recognises the
principle of wealth, which it seems appropriate to call Timocracy (I
give to it the name of a political constitution because people commonly
do so). Of these the best is Monarchy, and Timocracy the worst.

[Sidenote: II6ob] From Monarchy the deflection is Despotism; both being
Monarchies but widely differing from each other; for the Despot looks to
his own advantage, but the King to that of his subjects: for he is in
fact no King who is not thoroughly independent and superior to the rest
in all good things, and he that is this has no further wants: he will
not then have to look to his own advantage but to that of his subjects,
for he that is not in such a position is a mere King elected by lot for
the nonce.

But Despotism is on a contrary footing to this Kingship, because the
Despot pursues his own good: and in the case of this its inferiority
is most evident, and what is worse is contrary to what is best. The
Transition to Despotism is made from Kingship, Despotism being a corrupt
form of Monarchy, that is to say, the bad King comes to be a Despot.

From Aristocracy to Oligarchy the transition is made by the fault of the
Rulers in distributing the public property contrary to right proportion;
and giving either all that is good, or the greatest share, to
themselves; and the offices to the same persons always, making wealth
their idol; thus a few bear rule and they bad men in the place of the
best.

From Timocracy the transition is to Democracy, they being contiguous:
for it is the nature of Timocracy to be in the hands of a multitude,
and all in the same grade of property are equal. Democracy is the least
vicious of all, since herein the form of the constitution undergoes
least change.

Well, these are generally the changes to which the various Constitutions
are liable, being the least in degree and the easiest to make.

Likenesses, and, as it were, models of them, one may find even in
Domestic life: for instance, the Communion between a Father and his Sons
presents the figure of Kingship, because the children are the Father's
care: and hence Homer names Jupiter Father because Kingship is intended
to be a paternal rule. Among the Persians, however, the Father's rule is
Despotic, for they treat their Sons as slaves. (The relation of Master
to Slaves is of the nature of Despotism because the point regarded
herein is the Master's interest): this now strikes me to be as it ought,
but the Persian custom to be mistaken; because for different persons
there should be different rules. [Sidenote: 1161a] Between Husband and
Wife the relation takes the form of Aristocracy, because he rules by
right and in such points only as the Husband should, and gives to
the Wife all that befits her to have. Where the Husband lords it in
everything he changes the relation into an Oligarchy; because he does
it contrary to right and not as being the better of the two. In some
instances the Wives take the reins of government, being heiresses: here
the rule is carried on not in right of goodness but by reason of wealth
and power, as it is in Oligarchies.

Timocracy finds its type in the relation of Brothers: they being equal
except as to such differences as age introduces: for which reason, if
they are very different in age, the Friendship comes to be no longer
a fraternal one: while Democracy is represented specially by families
which have no head (all being there equal), or in which the proper head
is weak and so every member does that which is right in his own eyes.


XI

Attendant then on each form of Political Constitution there plainly is
Friendship exactly co-extensive with the principle of Justice; that
between a King and his Subjects being in the relation of a superiority
of benefit, inasmuch as he benefits his subjects; it being assumed that
he is a good king and takes care of their welfare as a shepherd tends
his flock; whence Homer (to quote him again) calls Agamemnon, "shepherd
of the people." And of this same kind is the Paternal Friendship, only
that it exceeds the former in the greatness of the benefits done;
because the father is the author of being (which is esteemed the
greatest benefit) and of maintenance and education (these things are
also, by the way, ascribed to ancestors generally): and by the law of
nature the father has the right of rule over his sons, ancestors over
their descendants, and the king over his subjects.

These friendships are also between superiors and inferiors, for which
reason parents are not merely loved but also honoured. The principle of
Justice also between these parties is not exactly the same but according
to proportiton, because so also is the Friendship.

Now between Husband and Wife there is the same Friendship as in
Aristocracy: for the relation is determined by relative excellence, and
the better person has the greater good and each has what befits: so too
also is the principle of Justice between them.

The Fraternal Friendship is like that of Companions, because brothers
are equal and much of an age, and such persons have generally like
feelings and like dispositions. Like to this also is the Friendship of a
Timocracy, because the citizens are intended to be equal and equitable:
rule, therefore, passes from hand to hand, and is distributed on equal
terms: so too is the Friendship accordingly.

[Sidenote: 1161b] In the deflections from the constitutional forms, just
as the principle of Justice is but small so is the Friendship also: and
least of all in the most perverted form: in Despotism there is little
or no Friendship. For generally wherever the ruler and the ruled have
nothing in common there is no Friendship because there is no Justice;
but the case is as between an artisan and his tool, or between soul and
body, and master and slave; all these are benefited by those who use
them, but towards things inanimate there is neither Friendship nor
Justice: nor even towards a horse or an ox, or a slave _quâ_ slave,
because there is nothing in common: a slave as such is an animate tool,
a tool an inanimate slave. _Quâ_ slave, then, there is no Friendship
towards him, only _quâ_ man: for it is thought that there is some
principle of Justice between every man, and every other who can share in
law and be a party to an agreement; and so somewhat of Friendship, in so
far as he is man. So in Despotisms the Friendships and the principle of
Justice are inconsiderable in extent, but in Democracies they are most
considerable because they who are equal have much in common.

XII


Now of course all Friendship is based upon Communion, as has been
already stated: but one would be inclined to separate off from the rest
the Friendship of Kindred, and that of Companions: whereas those of men
of the same city, or tribe, or crew, and all such, are more peculiarly,
it would seem, based upon Communion, inasmuch as they plainly exist in
right of some agreement expressed or implied: among these one may rank
also the Friendship of Hospitality,

The Friendship of Kindred is likewise of many kinds, and appears in all
its varieties to depend on the Parental: parents, I mean, love their
children as being a part of themselves, children love their parents as
being themselves somewhat derived from them. But parents know their
offspring more than these know that they are from the parents, and the
source is more closely bound to that which is produced than that which
is produced is to that which formed it: of course, whatever is derived
from one's self is proper to that from which it is so derived (as, for
instance, a tooth or a hair, or any other thing whatever to him that
has it): but the source to it is in no degree proper, or in an inferior
degree at least.

Then again the greater length of time comes in: the parents love their
offspring from the first moment of their being, but their offspring
them only after a lapse of time when they have attained intelligence
or instinct. These considerations serve also to show why mothers have
greater strength of affection than fathers.

Now parents love their children as themselves (since what is derived
from themselves becomes a kind of other Self by the fact of separation),
but children their parents as being sprung from them. And brothers love
one another from being sprung from the same; that is, their sameness
with the common stock creates a sameness with one another; whence come
the phrases, "same blood," "root," and so on. In fact they are the same,
in a sense, even in the separate distinct individuals.

Then again the being brought up together, and the nearness of age, are
a great help towards Friendship, for a man likes one of his own age and
persons who are used to one another are companions, which accounts
for the resemblance between the Friendship of Brothers and that of
Companions.

[Sidenote:1162a] And cousins and all other relatives derive their bond
of union from these, that is to say, from their community of origin: and
the strength of this bond varies according to their respective distances
from the common ancestor.

Further: the Friendship felt by children towards parents, and by men
towards the gods, is as towards something good and above them; because
these have conferred the greatest possible benefits, in that they are
the causes of their being and being nourished, and of their having been
educated after they were brought into being.

And Friendship of this kind has also the pleasurable and the profitable
more than that between persons unconnected by blood, in proportion as
their life is also more shared in common. Then again in the Fraternal
Friendship there is all that there is in that of Companions, and more in
the good, and generally in those who are alike; in proportion as they
are more closely tied and from their very birth have a feeling of
affection for one another to begin with, and as they are more like in
disposition who spring from the same stock and have grown up together
and been educated alike: and besides this they have the greatest
opportunities in respect of time for proving one another, and can
therefore depend most securely upon the trial. The elements
of Friendship between other consanguinities will be of course
proportionably similar.

Between Husband and Wife there is thought to be Friendship by a law of
nature: man being by nature disposed to pair, more than to associate in
Communities: in proportion as the family is prior in order of time and
more absolutely necessary than the Community. And procreation is more
common to him with other animals; all the other animals have Communion
thus far, but human creatures cohabit not merely for the sake of
procreation but also with a view to life in general: because in this
connection the works are immediately divided, and some belong to the
man, others to the woman: thus they help one the other, putting what is
peculiar to each into the common stock.

And for these reasons this Friendship is thought to combine the
profitable and the pleasurable: it will be also based upon virtue if
they are good people; because each has goodness and they may take
delight in this quality in each other. Children too are thought to be a
tie: accordingly the childless sooner separate, for the children are a
good common to both and anything in common is a bond of union.

The question how a man is to live with his wife, or (more generally) one
friend with another, appears to be no other than this, how it is just
that they should: because plainly there is not the same principle
of Justice between a friend and friend, as between strangers, or
companions, or mere chance fellow-travellers.

XIII

[Sidenote:1162b] There are then, as was stated at the commencement of
this book, three kinds of Friendship, and in each there may be friends
on a footing of equality and friends in the relation of superior and
inferior; we find, I mean, that people who are alike in goodness, become
friends, and better with worse, and so also pleasant people; again,
because of advantage people are friends, either balancing exactly their
mutual profitableness or differing from one another herein. Well then,
those who are equal should in right of this equality be equalised also
by the degree of their Friendship and the other points, and those who
are on a footing of inequality by rendering Friendship in proportion to
the superiority of the other party.

Fault-finding and blame arises, either solely or most naturally, in
Friendship of which utility is the motive: for they who are friends by
reason of goodness, are eager to do kindnesses to one another because
this is a natural result of goodness and Friendship; and when men are
vying with each other for this End there can be no fault-finding nor
contention: since no one is annoyed at one who entertains for him the
sentiment of Friendship and does kindnesses to him, but if of a refined
mind he requites him with kind actions. And suppose that one of the two
exceeds the other, yet as he is attaining his object he will not find
fault with his friend, for good is the object of each party.

Neither can there well be quarrels between men who are friends for
pleasure's sake: because supposing them to delight in living together
then both attain their desire; or if not a man would be put in a
ridiculous light who should find fault with another for not pleasing
him, since it is in his power to forbear intercourse with him. But
the Friendship because of advantage is very liable to fault-finding;
because, as the parties use one another with a view to advantage, the
requirements are continually enlarging, and they think they have less
than of right belongs to them, and find fault because though justly
entitled they do not get as much as they want: while they who do the
kindnesses, can never come up to the requirements of those to whom they
are being done.

It seems also, that as the Just is of two kinds, the unwritten and the
legal, so Friendship because of advantage is of two kinds, what may
be called the Moral, and the Legal: and the most fruitful source of
complaints is that parties contract obligations and discharge them not
in the same line of Friendship. The Legal is upon specified conditions,
either purely tradesmanlike from hand to hand or somewhat more
gentlemanly as regards time but still by agreement a _quid pro quo_.

In this Legal kind the obligation is clear and admits of no dispute, the
friendly element is the delay in requiring its discharge: and for this
reason in some countries no actions can be maintained at Law for the
recovery of such debts, it being held that they who have dealt on the
footing of credit must be content to abide the issue.

That which may be termed the Moral kind is not upon specified
conditions, but a man gives as to his friend and so on: but still he
expects to receive an equivalent, or even more, as though he had not
given but lent: he also will find fault, because he does not get the
obligation discharged in the same way as it was contracted.

[Sidenote:1163a] Now this results from the fact, that all men, or the
generality at least, _wish_ what is honourable, but, when tested,
_choose_ what is profitable; and the doing kindnesses disinterestedly
is honourable while receiving benefits is profitable. In such cases one
should, if able, make a return proportionate to the good received, and
do so willingly, because one ought not to make a disinterested friend of
a man against his inclination: one should act, I say, as having made a
mistake originally in receiving kindness from one from whom one ought
not to have received it, he being not a friend nor doing the act
disinterestedly; one should therefore discharge one's self of the
obligation as having received a kindness on specified terms: and if able
a man would engage to repay the kindness, while if he were unable even
the doer of it would not expect it of him: so that if he is able he
ought to repay it. But one ought at the first to ascertain from whom
one is receiving kindness, and on what understanding, that on that same
understanding one may accept it or not.

A question admitting of dispute is whether one is to measure a kindness
by the good done to the receiver of it, and make this the standard by
which to requite, or by the kind intention of the doer?

For they who have received kindnesses frequently plead in depreciation
that they have received from their benefactors such things as were small
for them to give, or such as they themselves could have got from others:
while the doers of the kindnesses affirm that they gave the best they
had, and what could not have been got from others, and under danger, or
in such-like straits.

May we not say, that as utility is the motive of the Friendship the
advantage conferred on the receiver must be the standard? because he it
is who requests the kindness and the other serves him in his need on the
understanding that he is to get an equivalent: the assistance rendered
is then exactly proportionate to the advantage which the receiver has
obtained, and he should therefore repay as much as he gained by it, or
even more, this being more creditable.

In Friendships based on goodness, the question, of course, is never
raised, but herein the motive of the doer seems to be the proper
standard, since virtue and moral character depend principally on motive.


XIV

Quarrels arise also in those Friendships in which the parties are
unequal because each party thinks himself entitled to the greater share,
and of course, when this happens, the Friendship is broken up.

The man who is better than the other thinks that having the greater
share pertains to him of right, for that more is always awarded to the
good man: and similarly the man who is more profitable to another than
that other to him: "one who is useless," they say, "ought not to share
equally, for it comes to a tax, and not a Friendship, unless the fruits
of the Friendship are reaped in proportion to the works done:" their
notion being, that as in a money partnership they who contribute more
receive more so should it be in Friendship likewise.

On the other hand, the needy man and the less virtuous advance the
opposite claim: they urge that "it is the very business of a good friend
to help those who are in need, else what is the use of having a good or
powerful friend if one is not to reap the advantage at all?"

[Sidenote: 1163b] Now each seems to advance a right claim and to be
entitled to get more out of the connection than the other, only _not
more of the same thing_: but the superior man should receive more
respect, the needy man more profit: respect being the reward of goodness
and beneficence, profit being the aid of need.

This is plainly the principle acted upon in Political Communities:
he receives no honour who gives no good to the common stock: for the
property of the Public is given to him who does good to the Public, and
honour is the property of the Public; it is not possible both to make
money out of the Public and receive honour likewise; because no one will
put up with the less in every respect: so to him who suffers loss as
regards money they award honour, but money to him who can be paid by
gifts: since, as has been stated before, the observing due proportion
equalises and preserves Friendship.

Like rules then should be observed in the intercourse of friends who
are unequal; and to him who advantages another in respect of money, or
goodness, that other should repay honour, making requital according to
his power; because Friendship requires what is possible, not what is
strictly due, this being not possible in all cases, as in the honours
paid to the gods and to parents: no man could ever make the due return
in these cases, and so he is thought to be a good man who pays respect
according to his ability.

For this reason it may be judged never to be allowable for a son to
disown his father, whereas a father may his son: because he that owes
is bound to pay; now a son can never, by anything he has done, fully
requite the benefits first conferred on him by his father, and so is
always a debtor. But they to whom anything is owed may cast off their
debtors: therefore the father may his son. But at the same time it must
perhaps be admitted, that it seems no father ever _would_ sever himself
utterly from a son, except in a case of exceeding depravity: because,
independently of the natural Friendship, it is like human nature not to
put away from one's self the assistance which a son might render. But to
the son, if depraved, assisting his father is a thing to be avoided, or
at least one which he will not be very anxious to do; most men
being willing enough to receive kindness, but averse to doing it as
unprofitable.

Let thus much suffice on these points.




BOOK IX


I

[Sidenote: 1164a] Well, in all the Friendships the parties to which are
dissimilar it is the proportionate which equalises and preserves the
Friendship, as has been already stated: I mean, in the Social Friendship
the cobbler, for instance, gets an equivalent for his shoes after a
certain rate; and the weaver, and all others in like manner. Now in
this case a common measure has been provided in money, and to this
accordingly all things are referred and by this are measured: but in
the Friendship of Love the complaint is sometimes from the lover that,
though he loves exceedingly, his love is not requited; he having perhaps
all the time nothing that can be the object of Friendship: again,
oftentimes from the object of love that he who as a suitor promised any
and every thing now performs nothing. These cases occur because the
Friendship of the lover for the beloved object is based upon pleasure,
that of the other for him upon utility, and in one of the parties the
requisite quality is not found: for, as these are respectively the
grounds of the Friendship, the Friendship comes to be broken up because
the motives to it cease to exist: the parties loved not one another but
qualities in one another which are not permanent, and so neither are the
Friendships: whereas the Friendship based upon the moral character of
the parties, being independent and disinterested, is permanent, as we
have already stated.

Quarrels arise also when the parties realise different results and not
those which they desire; for the not attaining one's special object is
all one, in this case, with getting nothing at all: as in the well-known
case where a man made promises to a musician, rising in proportion to
the excellence of his music; but when, the next morning, the musician
claimed the performance of his promises, he said that he had given him
pleasure for pleasure: of course, if each party had intended this, it
would have been all right: but if the one desires amusement and the
other gain, and the one gets his object but the other not, the dealing
cannot be fair: because a man fixes his mind upon what he happens to
want, and will give so and so for that specific thing.

The question then arises, who is to fix the rate? the man who first
gives, or the man who first takes? because, _prima facie_, the man who
first gives seems to leave the rate to be fixed by the other party.
This, they say, was in fact the practice of Protagoras: when he taught
a man anything he would bid the learner estimate the worth of the
knowledge gained by his own private opinion; and then he used to take so
much from him. In such cases some people adopt the rule,

  "With specified reward a friend should be content."

They are certainly fairly found fault with who take the money in advance
and then do nothing of what they said they would do, their promises
having been so far beyond their ability; for such men do not perform
what they agreed, The Sophists, however, are perhaps obliged to take
this course, because no one would give a sixpence for their knowledge.
These then, I say, are fairly found fault with, because they do not what
they have already taken money for doing.

[Sidenote: 1164b] In cases where no stipulation as to the respective
services is made they who disinterestedly do the first service will not
raise the question (as we have said before), because it is the nature of
Friendship, based on mutual goodness to be reference to the intention of
the other, the intention being characteristic of the true friend and of
goodness.

And it would seem the same rule should be laid down for those who are
connected with one another as teachers and learners of philosophy; for
here the value of the commodity cannot be measured by money, and, in
fact, an exactly equivalent price cannot be set upon it, but perhaps it
is sufficient to do what one can, as in the case of the gods or one's
parents.

But where the original giving is not upon these terms but avowedly for
some return, the most proper course is perhaps for the requital to be
such as _both_ shall allow to be proportionate, and, where this cannot
be, then for the receiver to fix the value would seem to be not only
necessary but also fair: because when the first giver gets that which is
equivalent to the advantage received by the other, or to what he would
have given to secure the pleasure he has had, then he has the value from
him: for not only is this seen to be the course adopted in matters of
buying and selling but also in some places the law does not allow of
actions upon voluntary dealings; on the principle that when one man has
trusted another he must be content to have the obligation discharged in
the same spirit as he originally contracted it: that is to say, it is
thought fairer for the trusted, than for the trusting, party, to fix the
value. For, in general, those who have and those who wish to get things
do not set the same value on them: what is their own, and what they give
in each case, appears to them worth a great deal: but yet the return
is made according to the estimate of those who have received first, it
should perhaps be added that the receiver should estimate what he has
received, not by the value he sets upon it now that he has it, but by
that which he set upon it before he obtained it.


II

Questions also arise upon such points as the following: Whether one's
father has an unlimited claim on one's services and obedience, or
whether the sick man is to obey his physician? or, in an election of
a general, the warlike qualities of the candidates should be alone
regarded?

In like manner whether one should do a service rather to one's friend or
to a good man? whether one should rather requite a benefactor or give to
one's companion, supposing that both are not within one's power?

[Sidenote: 1165a] Is not the true answer that it is no easy task to
determine all such questions accurately, inasmuch as they involve
numerous differences of all kinds, in respect of amount and what is
honourable and what is necessary? It is obvious, of course, that no one
person can unite in himself all claims. Again, the requital of benefits
is, in general, a higher duty than doing unsolicited kindnesses to one's
companion; in other words, the discharging of a debt is more obligatory
upon one than the duty of giving to a companion. And yet this rule may
admit of exceptions; for instance, which is the higher duty? for one who
has been ransomed out of the hands of robbers to ransom in return his
ransomer, be he who he may, or to repay him on his demand though he has
not been taken by robbers, or to ransom his own father? for it would
seem that a man ought to ransom his father even in preference to
himself.

Well then, as has been said already, as a general rule the debt
should be discharged, but if in a particular case the giving greatly
preponderates as being either honourable or necessary, we must be swayed
by these considerations: I mean, in some cases the requital of the
obligation previously existing may not be equal; suppose, for instance,
that the original benefactor has conferred a kindness on a good man,
knowing him to be such, whereas this said good man has to repay it
believing him to be a scoundrel.

And again, in certain cases no obligation lies on a man to lend to one
who has lent to him; suppose, for instance, that a bad man lent to him,
as being a good man, under the notion that he should get repaid, whereas
the said good man has no hope of repayment from him being a bad man.
Either then the case is really as we have supposed it and then the claim
is not equal, or it is not so but supposed to be; and still in so acting
people are not to be thought to act wrongly. In short, as has been
oftentimes stated before, all statements regarding feelings and actions
can be definite only in proportion as their object-matter is so; it is
of course quite obvious that all people have not the same claim upon
one, nor are the claims of one's father unlimited; just as Jupiter does
not claim all kinds of sacrifice without distinction: and since the
claims of parents, brothers, companions, and benefactors, are all
different, we must give to each what belongs to and befits each.

And this is seen to be the course commonly pursued: to marriages men
commonly invite their relatives, because these are from a common stock
and therefore all the actions in any way pertaining thereto are common
also: and to funerals men think that relatives ought to assemble in
preference to other people, for the same reason.

And it would seem that in respect of maintenance it is our duty to
assist our parents in preference to all others, as being their debtors,
and because it is more honourable to succour in these respects the
authors of our existence than ourselves. Honour likewise we ought to pay
to our parents just as to the gods, but then, not all kinds of honour:
not the same, for instance, to a father as to a mother: nor again to a
father the honour due to a scientific man or to a general but that
which is a father's due, and in like manner to a mother that which is a
mother's.

To all our elders also the honour befitting their age, by rising up in
their presence, turning out of the way for them, and all similar marks
of respect: to our companions again, or brothers, frankness and free
participation in all we have. And to those of the same family, or tribe,
or city, with ourselves, and all similarly connected with us, we should
constantly try to render their due, and to discriminate what belongs to
each in respect of nearness of connection, or goodness, or intimacy:
of course in the case of those of the same class the discrimination is
easier; in that of those who are in different classes it is a matter of
more trouble. This, however, should not be a reason for giving up
the attempt, but we must observe the distinctions so far as it is
practicable to do so.

III

A question is also raised as to the propriety of dissolving or not
dissolving those Friendships the parties to which do not remain what
they were when the connection was formed.

[Sidenote: 1165b] Now surely in respect of those whose motive to
Friendship is utility or pleasure there can be nothing wrong in breaking
up the connection when they no longer have those qualities; because they
were friends [not of one another, but] of those qualities: and, these
having failed, it is only reasonable to expect that they should cease to
entertain the sentiment.

But a man has reason to find fault if the other party, being really
attached to him because of advantage or pleasure, pretended to be so
because of his moral character: in fact, as we said at the commencement,
the most common source of quarrels between friends is their not being
friends on the same grounds as they suppose themselves to be.

Now when a man has been deceived in having supposed himself to excite
the sentiment of Friendship by reason of his moral character, the other
party doing nothing to indicate he has but himself to blame: but when he
has been deceived by the pretence of the other he has a right to find
fault with the man who has so deceived him, aye even more than with
utterers of false coin, in proportion to the greater preciousness of
that which is the object-matter of the villany.

But suppose a man takes up another as being a good man, who turns out,
and is found by him, to be a scoundrel, is he bound still to entertain
Friendship for him? or may we not say at once it is impossible? since
it is not everything which is the object-matter of Friendship, but only
that which is good; and so there is no obligation to be a bad man's
friend, nor, in fact, ought one to be such: for one ought not to be a
lover of evil, nor to be assimilated to what is base; which would be
implied, because we have said before, like is friendly to like.

Are we then to break with him instantly? not in all cases; only where
our friends are incurably depraved; when there is a chance of amendment
we are bound to aid in repairing the moral character of our friends
even more than their substance, in proportion as it is better and
more closely related to Friendship. Still he who should break off the
connection is not to be judged to act wrongly, for he never was a friend
to such a character as the other now is, and therefore, since the man is
changed and he cannot reduce him to his original state, he backs out of
the connection.

To put another case: suppose that one party remains what he was when
the Friendship was formed, while the other becomes morally improved and
widely different from his friend in goodness; is the improved character
to treat the other as a friend?

May we not say it is impossible? The case of course is clearest where
there is a great difference, as in the Friendships of boys: for suppose
that of two boyish friends the one still continues a boy in mind and the
other becomes a man of the highest character, how can they be friends?
since they neither are pleased with the same objects nor like and
dislike the same things: for these points will not belong to them as
regards one another, and without them it was assumed they cannot be
friends because they cannot live in intimacy: and of the case of those
who cannot do so we have spoken before.

Well then, is the improved party to bear himself towards his former
friend in no way differently to what he would have done had the
connection never existed?

Surely he ought to bear in mind the intimacy of past times, and just as
we think ourselves bound to do favours for our friends in preference to
strangers, so to those who have been friends and are so no longer we
should allow somewhat on the score of previous Friendship, whenever the
cause of severance is not excessive depravity on their part.




IV

[Sidenote: II66a] Now the friendly feelings which are exhibited towards
our friends, and by which Friendships are characterised, seem to have
sprung out of those which we entertain toward ourselves. I mean, people
define a friend to be "one who intends and does what is good (or what
he believes to be good) to another for that other's sake," or "one who
wishes his friend to be and to live for that friend's own sake" (which
is the feeling of mothers towards their children, and of friends who
have come into collision). Others again, "one who lives with another and
chooses the same objects," or "one who sympathises with his friend in
his sorrows and in his joys" (this too is especially the case with
mothers).

Well, by some one of these marks people generally characterise
Friendship: and each of these the good man has towards himself, and all
others have them in so far as they suppose themselves to be good. (For,
as has been said before, goodness, that is the good man, seems to be a
measure to every one else.)

For he is at unity in himself, and with every part of his soul he
desires the same objects; and he wishes for himself both what is, and
what he believes to be, good; and he does it (it being characteristic
of the good man to work at what is good), and for the sake of himself,
inasmuch as he does it for the sake of his Intellectual Principle which
is generally thought to be a man's Self. Again, he wishes himself And
specially this Principle whereby he is an intelligent being, to live and
be preserved in life, because existence is a good to him that is a good
man.

But it is to himself that each individual wishes what is good, and no
man, conceiving the possibility of his becoming other than he now is,
chooses that that New Self should have all things indiscriminately: a
god, for instance, has at the present moment the Chief Good, but he has
it in right of being whatever he actually now is: and the Intelligent
Principle must be judged to be each man's Self, or at least eminently so
[though other Principles help, of course, to constitute him the man he
is]. Furthermore, the good man wishes to continue to live with himself;
for he can do it with pleasure, in that his memories of past actions are
full of delight and his anticipations of the future are good and such
are pleasurable. Then, again, he has good store of matter for his
Intellect to contemplate, and he most especially sympathises with his
Self in its griefs and joys, because the objects which give him pain and
pleasure are at all times the same, not one thing to-day and a different
one to-morrow: because he is not given to repentance, if one may so
speak. It is then because each of these feelings are entertained by the
good man towards his own Self and a friend feels towards a friend as
towards himself (a friend being in fact another Self), that Friendship
is thought to be some one of these things and they are accounted friends
in whom they are found. Whether or no there can really be Friendship
between a man and his Self is a question we will not at present
entertain: there may be thought to be Friendship, in so far as there are
two or more of the aforesaid requisites, and because the highest degree
of Friendship, in the usual acceptation of that term, resembles the
feeling entertained by a man towards himself.

[Sidenote: 1166b] But it may be urged that the aforesaid requisites are
to all appearance found in the common run of men, though they are men of
a low stamp.

May it not be answered, that they share in them only in so far as they
please themselves, and conceive themselves to be good? for certainly,
they are not either really, or even apparently, found in any one of
those who are very depraved and villainous; we may almost say not
even in those who are bad men at all: for they are at variance with
themselves and lust after different things from those which in cool
reason they wish for, just as men who fail of Self-Control: I mean, they
choose things which, though hurtful, are pleasurable, in preference to
those which in their own minds they believe to be good: others again,
from cowardice and indolence, decline to do what still they are
convinced is best for them: while they who from their depravity have
actually done many dreadful actions hate and avoid life, and accordingly
kill themselves: and the wicked seek others in whose company to spend
their time, but fly from themselves because they have many unpleasant
subjects of memory, and can only look forward to others like them when
in solitude but drown their remorse in the company of others: and as
they have nothing to raise the sentiment of Friendship so they never
feel it towards themselves.

Neither, in fact, can they who are of this character sympathise with
their Selves in their joys and sorrows, because their soul is, as it
were, rent by faction, and the one principle, by reason of the depravity
in them, is grieved at abstaining from certain things, while the other
and better principle is pleased thereat; and the one drags them this way
and the other that way, as though actually tearing them asunder. And
though it is impossible actually to have at the same time the sensations
of pain and pleasure; yet after a little time the man is sorry for
having been pleased, and he could wish that those objects had not given
him pleasure; for the wicked are full of remorse.

It is plain then that the wicked man cannot be in the position of a
friend even towards himself, because he has in himself nothing which can
excite the sentiment of Friendship. If then to be thus is exceedingly
wretched it is a man's duty to flee from wickedness with all his might
and to strive to be good, because thus may he be friends with himself
and may come to be a friend to another.

[Sidenote: V] Kindly Feeling, though resembling Friendship, is not
identical with it, because it may exist in reference to those whom we
do not know and without the object of it being aware of its existence,
which Friendship cannot. (This, by the way, has also been said before.)
And further, it is not even Affection because it does not imply
intensity nor yearning, which are both consequences of Affection. Again
Affection requires intimacy but Kindly Feeling may arise quite suddenly,
as happens sometimes in respect of men against whom people are matched
in any way, I mean they come to be kindly disposed to them and
sympathise in their wishes, but still they would not join them in any
action, because, as we said, they conceive this feeling of kindness
suddenly and so have but a superficial liking.

What it does seem to be is the starting point of a Friendship; just as
pleasure, received through the sight, is the commencement of Love: for
no one falls in love without being first pleased with the personal
appearance of the beloved object, and yet he who takes pleasure in it
does not therefore necessarily love, but when he wearies for the object
in its absence and desires its presence. Exactly in the same way men
cannot be friends without having passed through the stage of Kindly
Feeling, and yet they who are in that stage do not necessarily advance
to Friendship: they merely have an inert wish for the good of those
toward whom they entertain the feeling, but would not join them in
any action, nor put themselves out of the way for them. So that, in
a metaphorical way of speaking, one might say that it is dormant
Friendship, and when it has endured for a space and ripened into
intimacy comes to be real Friendship; but not that whose object is
advantage or pleasure, because such motives cannot produce even Kindly
Feeling.

I mean, he who has received a kindness requites it by Kindly Feeling
towards his benefactor, and is right in so doing: but he who wishes
another to be prosperous, because he has hope of advantage through his
instrumentality, does not seem to be kindly disposed to that person but
rather to himself; just as neither is he his friend if he pays court to
him for any interested purpose.

Kindly Feeling always arises by reason of goodness and a certain
amiability, when one man gives another the notion of being a fine
fellow, or brave man, etc., as we said was the case sometimes with those
matched against one another.

[Sidenote: VI] Unity of Sentiment is also plainly connected with
Friendship, and therefore is not the same as Unity of Opinion,
because this might exist even between people unacquainted with one
another.

Nor do men usually say people are united in sentiment merely because
they agree in opinion on _any_ point, as, for instance, on points
of astronomical science (Unity of Sentiment herein not having any
connection with Friendship), but they say that Communities have Unity of
Sentiment when they agree respecting points of expediency and take the
same line and carry out what has been determined in common consultation.

Thus we see that Unity of Sentiment has for its object matters of
action, and such of these as are of importance, and of mutual, or, in
the case of single States, common, interest: when, for instance, all
agree in the choice of magistrates, or forming alliance with the
Lacedæmonians, or appointing Pittacus ruler (that is to say, supposing
he himself was willing). [Sidenote: 1167_b_] But when each wishes
himself to be in power (as the brothers in the Phoenissæ), they quarrel
and form parties: for, plainly, Unity of Sentiment does not merely imply
that each entertains the same idea be it what it may, but that they do
so in respect of the same object, as when both the populace and the
sensible men of a State desire that the best men should be in office,
because then all attain their object.

Thus Unity of Sentiment is plainly a social Friendship, as it is also
said to be: since it has for its object-matter things expedient and
relating to life.

And this Unity exists among the good: for they have it towards
themselves and towards one another, being, if I may be allowed the
expression, in the same position: I mean, the wishes of such men are
steady and do not ebb and flow like the Euripus, and they wish what is
just and expedient and aim at these things in common.

The bad, on the contrary, can as little have Unity of Sentiment as they
can be real friends, except to a very slight extent, desiring as they
do unfair advantage in things profitable while they shirk labour and
service for the common good: and while each man wishes for these things
for himself he is jealous of and hinders his neighbour: and as they
do not watch over the common good it is lost. The result is that they
quarrel while they are for keeping one another to work but are not
willing to perform their just share.

[Sidenote: VII] Benefactors are commonly held to have more Friendship
for the objects of their kindness than these for them: and the fact
is made a subject of discussion and inquiry, as being contrary to
reasonable expectation.

The account of the matter which satisfies most persons is that the one
are debtors and the others creditors: and therefore that, as in the case
of actual loans the debtors wish their creditors out of the way while
the creditors are anxious for the preservation of their debtors, so
those who have done kindnesses desire the continued existence of the
people they have done them to, under the notion of getting a return
of their good offices, while these are not particularly anxious about
requital.

Epicharmus, I suspect, would very probably say that they who give this
solution judge from their own baseness; yet it certainly is like human
nature, for the generality of men have short memories on these points,
and aim rather at receiving than conferring benefits.

But the real cause, it would seem, rests upon nature, and the case is
not parallel to that of creditors; because in this there is no affection
to the persons, but merely a wish for their preservation with a view to
the return: whereas, in point of fact, they who have done kindnesses
feel friendship and love for those to whom they have done them, even
though they neither are, nor can by possibility hereafter be, in a
position to serve their benefactors.

[Sidenote: 1168_a_] And this is the case also with artisans; every one,
I mean, feels more affection for his own work than that work possibly
could for him if it were animate. It is perhaps specially the case with
poets: for these entertain very great affection for their poems, loving
them as their own children. It is to this kind of thing I should be
inclined to compare the case of benefactors: for the object of their
kindness is their own work, and so they love this more than this loves
its creator.

And the account of this is that existence is to all a thing choiceworthy
and an object of affection; now we exist by acts of working, that is, by
living and acting; he then that has created a given work exists, it may
be said, by his act of working: therefore he loves his work because he
loves existence. And this is natural, for the work produced displays in
act what existed before potentially.

Then again, the benefactor has a sense of honour in right of his action,
so that he may well take pleasure in him in whom this resides; but to
him who has received the benefit there is nothing honourable in respect
of his benefactor, only something advantageous which is both less
pleasant and less the object of Friendship.

Again, pleasure is derived from the actual working out of a present
action, from the anticipation of a future one, and from the recollection
of a past one: but the highest pleasure and special object of affection
is that which attends on the actual working. Now the benefactor's work
abides (for the honourable is enduring), but the advantage of him who
has received the kindness passes away.

Again, there is pleasure in recollecting honourable actions, but in
recollecting advantageous ones there is none at all or much less (by the
way though, the contrary is true of the expectation of advantage).

Further, the entertaining the feeling of Friendship is like acting on
another; but being the object of the feeling is like being acted upon.

So then, entertaining the sentiment of Friendship, and all feelings
connected with it, attend on those who, in the given case of a
benefaction, are the superior party.

Once more: all people value most what has cost them much labour in the
production; for instance, people who have themselves made their money
are fonder of it than those who have inherited it: and receiving
kindness is, it seems, unlaborious, but doing it is laborious. And this
is the reason why the female parents are most fond of their offspring;
for their part in producing them is attended with most labour, and they
know more certainly that they are theirs. This feeling would seem also
to belong to benefactors.

[Sidenote: VIII] A question is also raised as to whether it is right
to love one's Self best, or some one else: because men find fault with
those who love themselves best, and call them in a disparaging way
lovers of Self; and the bad man is thought to do everything he does
for his own sake merely, and the more so the more depraved he is;
accordingly men reproach him with never doing anything unselfish:
whereas the good man acts from a sense of honour (and the more so the
better man he is), and for his friend's sake, and is careless of his own
interest.

[Sidenote: 1168_b_] But with these theories facts are at variance, and
not unnaturally: for it is commonly said also that a man is to love most
him who is most his friend, and he is most a friend who wishes good to
him to whom he wishes it for that man's sake even though no one knows.
Now these conditions, and in fact all the rest by which a friend is
characterised, belong specially to each individual in respect of his
Self: for we have said before that all the friendly feelings are derived
to others from those which have Self primarily for their object. And all
the current proverbs support this view; for instance, "one soul," "the
goods of friends are common," "equality is a tie of Friendship," "the
knee is nearer than the shin." For all these things exist specially with
reference to a man's own Self: he is specially a friend to himself and
so he is bound to love himself the most.

It is with good reason questioned which of the two parties one should
follow, both having plausibility on their side. Perhaps then, in respect
of theories of this kind, the proper course is to distinguish and define
how far each is true, and in what way. If we could ascertain the sense
in which each uses the term "Self-loving," this point might be cleared
up.

Well now, they who use it disparagingly give the name to those who,
in respect of wealth, and honours, and pleasures of the body, give to
themselves the larger share: because the mass of mankind grasp after
these and are earnest about them as being the best things; which is the
reason why they are matters of contention. They who are covetous in
regard to these gratify their lusts and passions in general, that is to
say the irrational part of their soul: now the mass of mankind are so
disposed, for which reason the appellation has taken its rise from that
mass which is low and bad. Of course they are justly reproached who are
Self-loving in this sense.

And that the generality of men are accustomed to apply the term to
denominate those who do give such things to themselves is quite plain:
suppose, for instance, that a man were anxious to do, more than other
men, acts of justice, or self-mastery, or any other virtuous acts, and,
in general, were to secure to himself that which is abstractedly noble
and honourable, no one would call him Self-loving, nor blame him.

Yet might such an one be judged to be more truly Self-loving: certainly
he gives to himself the things which are most noble and most good,
and gratifies that Principle of his nature which is most rightfully
authoritative, and obeys it in everything: and just as that which
possesses the highest authority is thought to constitute a Community or
any other system, so also in the case of Man: and so he is most truly
Self-loving who loves and gratifies this Principle.

Again, men are said to have, or to fail of having, self-control,
according as the Intellect controls or not, it being plainly implied
thereby that this Principle constitutes each individual; and people are
thought to have done of themselves, and voluntarily, those things
specially which are done with Reason. [Sidenote: 1169_a_]

It is plain, therefore, that this Principle does, either entirely or
specially constitute the individual man, and that the good man specially
loves this. For this reason then he must be specially Self-loving, in a
kind other than that which is reproached, and as far superior to it as
living in accordance with Reason is to living at the beck and call of
passion, and aiming at the truly noble to aiming at apparent advantage.

Now all approve and commend those who are eminently earnest about
honourable actions, and if all would vie with one another in respect of
the [Greek: kalhon], and be intent upon doing what is most truly noble
and honourable, society at large would have all that is proper while
each individual in particular would have the greatest of goods, Virtue
being assumed to be such.

And so the good man ought to be Self-loving: because by doing what is
noble he will have advantage himself and will do good to others: but the
bad man ought not to be, because he will harm himself and his neighbours
by following low and evil passions. In the case of the bad man, what he
ought to do and what he does are at variance, but the good man does what
he ought to do, because all Intellect chooses what is best for itself
and the good man puts himself under the direction of Intellect.

Of the good man it is true likewise that he does many things for the
sake of his friends and his country, even to the extent of dying for
them, if need be: for money and honours, and, in short, all the good
things which others fight for, he will throw away while eager to secure
to himself the [Greek: kalhon]: he will prefer a brief and great joy
to a tame and enduring one, and to live nobly for one year rather than
ordinarily for many, and one great and noble action to many trifling
ones. And this is perhaps that which befals men who die for their
country and friends; they choose great glory for themselves: and they
will lavish their own money that their friends may receive more, for
hereby the friend gets the money but the man himself the [Greek:
kalhon]; so, in fact he gives to himself the greater good. It is the
same with honours and offices; all these things he will give up to his
friend, because this reflects honour and praise on himself: and so
with good reason is he esteemed a fine character since he chooses the
honourable before all things else. It is possible also to give up the
opportunities of action to a friend; and to have caused a friend's doing
a thing may be more noble than having done it one's self.

In short, in all praiseworthy things the good man does plainly give to
himself a larger share of the honourable. [Sidenote: 1169_b_] In this
sense it is right to be Self-loving, in the vulgar acceptation of the
term it is not.

[Sidenote: IX] A question is raised also respecting the Happy man,
whether he will want Friends, or no?

Some say that they who are blessed and independent have no need of
Friends, for they already have all that is good, and so, as being
independent, want nothing further: whereas the notion of a friend's
office is to be as it were a second Self and procure for a man what he
cannot get by himself: hence the saying,

  "When Fortune gives us good, what need we Friends?"

On the other hand, it looks absurd, while we are assigning to the Happy
man all other good things, not to give him Friends, which are, after
all, thought to be the greatest of external goods.

Again, if it is more characteristic of a friend to confer than to
receive kindnesses, and if to be beneficent belongs to the good man and
to the character of virtue, and if it is more noble to confer kindnesses
on friends than strangers, the good man will need objects for his
benefactions. And out of this last consideration springs a question
whether the need of Friends be greater in prosperity or adversity, since
the unfortunate man wants people to do him kindnesses and they who are
fortunate want objects for their kind acts.

Again, it is perhaps absurd to make our Happy man a solitary, because
no man would choose the possession of all goods in the world on the
condition of solitariness, man being a social animal and formed by
nature for living with others: of course the Happy man has this
qualification since he has all those things which are good by nature:
and it is obvious that the society of friends and good men must be
preferable to that of strangers and ordinary people, and we conclude,
therefore, that the Happy man does need Friends.

But then, what do they mean whom we quoted first, and how are they
right? Is it not that the mass of mankind mean by Friends those who are
useful? and of course the Happy man will not need such because he has
all good things already; neither will he need such as are Friends with
a view to the pleasurable, or at least only to a slight extent; because
his life, being already pleasurable, does not want pleasure imported
from without; and so, since the Happy man does not need Friends of these
kinds, he is thought not to need any at all.

But it may be, this is not true: for it was stated originally, that
Happiness is a kind of Working; now Working plainly is something
that must come into being, not be already there like a mere piece of
property.

[Sidenote: 1170_a_] If then the being happy consists in living and
working, and the good man's working is in itself excellent and
pleasurable (as we said at the commencement of the treatise), and if
what is our own reckons among things pleasurable, and if we can view our
neighbours better than ourselves and their actions better than we
can our own, then the actions of their Friends who are good men are
pleasurable to the good; inasmuch as they have both the requisites which
are naturally pleasant. So the man in the highest state of happiness
will need Friends of this kind, since he desires to contemplate good
actions, and actions of his own, which those of his friend, being a good
man, are. Again, common opinion requires that the Happy man live with
pleasure to himself: now life is burthensome to a man in solitude, for
it is not easy to work continuously by one's self, but in company with,
and in regard to others, it is easier, and therefore the working, being
pleasurable in itself will be more continuous (a thing which should be
in respect of the Happy man); for the good man, in that he is good takes
pleasure in the actions which accord with Virtue and is annoyed at those
which spring from Vice, just as a musical man is pleased with beautiful
music and annoyed by bad. And besides, as Theognis says, Virtue itself
may be improved by practice, from living with the good.

And, upon the following considerations more purely metaphysical, it will
probably appear that the good friend is naturally choiceworthy to the
good man. We have said before, that whatever is naturally good is also
in itself good and pleasant to the good man; now the fact of living, so
far as animals are concerned, is characterised generally by the power
of sentience, in man it is characterised by that of sentience, or
of rationality (the faculty of course being referred to the actual
operation of the faculty, certainly the main point is the actual
operation of it); so that living seems mainly to consist in the act of
sentience or exerting rationality: now the fact of living is in itself
one of the things that are good and pleasant (for it is a definite
totality, and whatever is such belongs to the nature of good), but what
is naturally good is good to the good man: for which reason it seems
to be pleasant to all. (Of course one must not suppose a life which is
depraved and corrupted, nor one spent in pain, for that which is such is
indefinite as are its inherent qualities: however, what is to be said of
pain will be clearer in what is to follow.)

If then the fact of living is in itself good and pleasant (and this
appears from the fact that all desire it, and specially those who are
good and in high happiness; their course of life being most choiceworthy
and their existence most choiceworthy likewise), then also he that sees
perceives that he sees; and he that hears perceives that he hears; and
he that walks perceives that he walks; and in all the other instances
in like manner there is a faculty which reflects upon and perceives the
fact that we are working, so that we can perceive that we perceive and
intellectually know that we intellectually know: but to perceive that we
perceive or that we intellectually know is to perceive that we exist,
since existence was defined to be perceiving or intellectually knowing.
[Sidenote: 1170_b_ Now to perceive that one lives is a thing pleasant
in itself, life being a thing naturally good, and the perceiving of the
presence in ourselves of things naturally good being pleasant.]

Therefore the fact of living is choiceworthy, and to the good specially
so since existence is good and pleasant to them: for they receive
pleasure from the internal consciousness of that which in itself is
good.

But the good man is to his friend as to himself, friend being but a name
for a second Self; therefore as his own existence is choiceworthy to
each so too, or similarly at least, is his friend's existence. But the
ground of one's own existence being choiceworthy is the perceiving of
one's self being good, any such perception being in itself pleasant.
Therefore one ought to be thoroughly conscious of one's friend's
existence, which will result from living with him, that is sharing in
his words and thoughts: for this is the meaning of the term as applied
to the human species, not mere feeding together as in the case of
brutes.

If then to the man in a high state of happiness existence is in itself
choiceworthy, being naturally good and pleasant, and so too a friend's
existence, then the friend also must be among things choiceworthy. But
whatever is choiceworthy to a man he should have or else he will be in
this point deficient. The man therefore who is to come up to our notion
"Happy" will need good Friends. Are we then to make our friends as
numerous as possible? or, as in respect of acquaintance it is thought
to have been well said "have not thou many acquaintances yet be not
without;" so too in respect of Friendship may we adopt the precept, and
say that a man should not be without friends, nor again have exceeding
many friends?

Now as for friends who are intended for use, the maxim I have quoted
will, it seems, fit in exceedingly well, because to requite the services
of many is a matter of labour, and a whole life would not be long enough
to do this for them. So that, if more numerous than what will suffice
for one's own life, they become officious, and are hindrances in respect
of living well: and so we do not want them. And again of those who are
to be for pleasure a few are quite enough, just like sweetening in our
food.




X


But of the good are we to make as many as ever we can, or is there
any measure of the number of friends, as there is of the number to
constitute a Political Community? I mean, you cannot make one out of ten
men, and if you increase the number to one hundred thousand it is not
any longer a Community. However, the number is not perhaps some one
definite number but any between certain extreme limits.

[Sidenote: 1171_a_] Well, of friends likewise there is a limited number,
which perhaps may be laid down to be the greatest number with whom it
would be possible to keep up intimacy; this being thought to be one of
the greatest marks of Friendship, and it being quite obvious that it is
not possible to be intimate with many, in other words, to part one's
self among many. And besides it must be remembered that they also are to
be friends to one another if they are all to live together: but it is a
matter of difficulty to find this in many men at once.

It comes likewise to be difficult to bring home to one's self the joys
and sorrows of many: because in all probability one would have to
sympathise at the same time with the joys of this one and the sorrows of
that other.

Perhaps then it is well not to endeavour to have very many friends but
so many as are enough for intimacy: because, in fact, it would seem not
to be possible to be very much a friend to many at the same time: and,
for the same reason, not to be in love with many objects at the same
time: love being a kind of excessive Friendship which implies but one
object: and all strong emotions must be limited in the number towards
whom they are felt.

And if we look to facts this seems to be so: for not many at a time
become friends in the way of companionship, all the famous Friendships
of the kind are between _two_ persons: whereas they who have many
friends, and meet everybody on the footing of intimacy, seem to be
friends really to no one except in the way of general society; I mean
the characters denominated as over-complaisant.

To be sure, in the way merely of society, a man may be a friend to many
without being necessarily over-complaisant, but being truly good: but
one cannot be a friend to many because of their virtue, and for the
persons' own sake; in fact, it is a matter for contentment to find even
a few such.


XI

Again: are friends most needed in prosperity or in adversity? they are
required, we know, in both states, because the unfortunate need help and
the prosperous want people to live with and to do kindnesses to: for
they have a desire to act kindly to some one.

To have friends is more necessary in adversity, and therefore in this
case useful ones are wanted; and to have them in prosperity is more
honourable, and this is why the prosperous want good men for friends, it
being preferable to confer benefits on, and to live with, these. For the
very presence of friends is pleasant even in adversity: since men when
grieved are comforted by the sympathy of their friends.

And from this, by the way, the question might be raised, whether it is
that they do in a manner take part of the weight of calamities, or only
that their presence, being pleasurable, and the consciousness of their
sympathy, make the pain of the sufferer less. However, we will not
further discuss whether these which have been suggested or some other
causes produce the relief, at least the effect we speak of is a matter
of plain fact.

[Sidenote: _1171b_] But their presence has probably a mixed effect: I
mean, not only is the very seeing friends pleasant, especially to one in
misfortune, and actual help towards lessening the grief is afforded
(the natural tendency of a friend, if he is gifted with tact, being
to comfort by look and word, because he is well acquainted with the
sufferer's temper and disposition and therefore knows what things give
him pleasure and pain), but also the perceiving a friend to be grieved
at his misfortunes causes the sufferer pain, because every one avoids
being cause of pain to his friends. And for this reason they who are
of a manly nature are cautious not to implicate their friends in their
pain; and unless a man is exceedingly callous to the pain of others he
cannot bear the pain which is thus caused to his friends: in short, he
does not admit men to wail with him, not being given to wail at all:
women, it is true, and men who resemble women, like to have others to
groan with them, and love such as friends and sympathisers. But it
is plain that it is our duty in all things to imitate the highest
character.

On the other hand, the advantages of friends in our prosperity are the
pleasurable intercourse and the consciousness that they are pleased at
our good fortune.

It would seem, therefore, that we ought to call in friends readily on
occasion of good fortune, because it is noble to be ready to do good to
others: but on occasion of bad fortune, we should do so with reluctance;
for we should as little as possible make others share in our ills; on
which principle goes the saying, "I am unfortunate, let that suffice."
The most proper occasion for calling them in is when with small trouble
or annoyance to themselves they can be of very great use to the person
who needs them.

But, on the contrary, it is fitting perhaps to go to one's friends in
their misfortunes unasked and with alacrity (because kindness is the
friend's office and specially towards those who are in need and who do
not demand it as a right, this being more creditable and more pleasant
to both); and on occasion of their good fortune to go readily, if we
can forward it in any way (because men need their friends for this
likewise), but to be backward in sharing it, any great eagerness to
receive advantage not being creditable.

One should perhaps be cautious not to present the appearance of
sullenness in declining the sympathy or help of friends, for this
happens occasionally.

It appears then that the presence of friends is, under all
circumstances, choiceworthy.

May we not say then that, as seeing the beloved object is most prized by
lovers and they choose this sense rather than any of the others because
Love

  "Is engendered in the eyes,
  With gazing fed,"

in like manner intimacy is to friends most choiceworthy, Friendship
being communion? Again, as a man is to himself so is he to his friend;
now with respect to himself the perception of his own existence is
choiceworthy, therefore is it also in respect of his friend.

And besides, their Friendship is acted out in intimacy, and so with good
reason they desire this. And whatever in each man's opinion constitutes
existence, or whatsoever it is for the sake of which they choose life,
herein they wish their friends to join with them; and so some men drink
together, others gamble, others join in gymnastic exercises or hunting,
others study philosophy together: in each case spending their days
together in that which they like best of all things in life, for since
they wish to be intimate with their friends they do and partake in those
things whereby they think to attain this object.

Therefore the Friendship of the wicked comes to be depraved; for, being
unstable, they share in what is bad and become depraved in being made
like to one another: but the Friendship of the good is good, growing
with their intercourse; they improve also, as it seems, by repeated
acts, and by mutual correction, for they receive impress from one
another in the points which give them pleasure; whence says the poet,

  "Thou from the good, good things shalt surely learn."

Here then we will terminate our discourse of Friendship. The next thing
is to go into the subject of Pleasure.




BOOK X


Next, it would seem, follows a discussion respecting Pleasure, for it is
thought to be most closely bound up with our kind: and so men train the
young, guiding them on their course by the rudders of Pleasure and Pain.
And to like and dislike what one ought is judged to be most important
for the formation of good moral character: because these feelings extend
all one's life through, giving a bias towards and exerting an influence
on the side of Virtue and Happiness, since men choose what is pleasant
and avoid what is painful.

Subjects such as these then, it would seem, we ought by no means to pass
by, and specially since they involve much difference of opinion. There
are those who call Pleasure the Chief Good; there are others who on the
contrary maintain that it is exceedingly bad; some perhaps from a real
conviction that such is the case, others from a notion that it is
better, in reference to our life and conduct, to show up Pleasure as
bad, even if it is not so really; arguing that, as the mass of men have
a bias towards it and are the slaves of their pleasures, it is right to
draw them to the contrary, for that so they may possibly arrive at the
mean.

I confess I suspect the soundness of this policy; in matters respecting
men's feelings and actions theories are less convincing than facts:
whenever, therefore, they are found conflicting with actual experience,
they not only are despised but involve the truth in their fall: he, for
instance, who deprecates Pleasure, if once seen to aim at it, gets the
credit of backsliding to it as being universally such as he said it was,
the mass of men being incapable of nice distinctions.

Real accounts, therefore, of such matters seem to be most expedient, not
with a view to knowledge merely but to life and conduct: for they are
believed as being in harm with facts, and so they prevail with the wise
to live in accordance with them.

But of such considerations enough: let us now proceed to the current
maxims respecting Pleasure.

II Now Eudoxus thought Pleasure to be the Chief Good because he saw all,
rational and irrational alike, aiming at it: and he argued that, since
in all what was the object of choice must be good and what most so the
best, the fact of all being drawn to the same thing proved this thing to
be the best for all: "For each," he said, "finds what is good for itself
just as it does its proper nourishment, and so that which is good for
all, and the object of the aim of all, is their Chief Good."

(And his theories were received, not so much for their own sake, as
because of his excellent moral character; for he was thought to be
eminently possessed of perfect self-mastery, and therefore it was not
thought that he said these things because he was a lover of Pleasure but
that he really was so convinced.)

And he thought his position was not less proved by the argument from the
contrary: that is, since Pain was in itself an object of avoidance to
all the contrary must be in like manner an object of choice.

Again he urged that that is most choiceworthy which we choose, not by
reason of, or with a view to, anything further; and that Pleasure is
confessedly of this kind because no one ever goes on to ask to what
purpose he is pleased, feeling that Pleasure is in itself choiceworthy.

Again, that when added to any other good it makes it more choiceworthy;
as, for instance, to actions of justice, or perfected self-mastery; and
good can only be increased by itself.

However, this argument at least seems to prove only that it belongs to
the class of goods, and not that it does so more than anything else: for
every good is more choicewortby in combination with some other than when
taken quite alone. In fact, it is by just such an argument that Plato
proves that Pleasure is not the Chief Good: "For," says he, "the life of
Pleasure is more choiceworthy in combination with Practical Wisdom than
apart from it; but, if the compound better then simple Pleasure cannot
be the Chief Good; because the very Chief Good cannot by any addition
become choiceworthy than it is already:" and it is obvious that nothing
else can be the Chief Good, which by combination with any of the things
in themselves good comes to be more choiceworthy.

What is there then of such a nature? (meaning, of course, whereof we can
partake; because that which we are in search of must be such).

As for those who object that "what all aim at is not necessarily good,"
I confess I cannot see much in what they say, because what all _think_
we say _is_. And he who would cut away this ground from under us will
not bring forward things more dependable: because if the argument had
rested on the desires of irrational creatures there might have been
something in what he says, but, since the rational also desire Pleasure,
how can his objection be allowed any weight? and it may be that, even in
the lower animals, there is some natural good principle above themselves
which aims at the good peculiar to them.

Nor does that seem to be sound which is urged respecting the argument
from the contrary: I mean, some people say "it does not follow that
Pleasure must be good because Pain is evil, since evil may be opposed to
evil, and both evil and good to what is indifferent:" now what they say
is right enough in itself but does not hold in the present instance.
If both Pleasure and Pain were bad both would have been objects of
avoidance; or if neither then neither would have been, at all events
they must have fared alike: but now men do plainly avoid the one as bad
and choose the other as good, and so there is a complete opposition. III
Nor again is Pleasure therefore excluded from being good because it
does not belong to the class of qualities: the acts of virtue are not
qualities, neither is Happiness [yet surely both are goods].

Again, they say the Chief Good is limited but Pleasure unlimited, in
that it admits of degrees.

Now if they judge this from the act of feeling Pleasure then the same
thing will apply to justice and all the other virtues, in respect of
which clearly it is said that men are more or less of such and such
characters (according to the different virtues), they are more just or
more brave, or one may practise justice and self-mastery more or less.

If, on the other hand, they judge in respect of the Pleasures themselves
then it may be they miss the true cause, namely that some are unmixed
and others mixed: for just as health being in itself limited, admits of
degrees, why should not Pleasure do so and yet be limited? in the former
case we account for it by the fact that there is not the same adjustment
of parts in all men, nor one and the same always in the same individual:
but health, though relaxed, remains up to a certain point, and differs
in degrees; and of course the same may be the case with Pleasure.

Again, assuming the Chief Good to be perfect and all Movements and
Generations imperfect, they try to shew that Pleasure is a Movement and
a Generation.

Yet they do not seem warranted in saying even that it is a Movement: for
to every Movement are thought to belong swiftness and slowness, and
if not in itself, as to that of the universe, yet relatively: but to
Pleasure neither of these belongs: for though one may have got quickly
into the state Pleasure, as into that of anger, one cannot be in the
state quickly, nor relatively to the state of any other person; but we
can walk or grow, and so on, quickly or slowly.

Of course it is possible to change into the state of Pleasure quickly or
slowly, but to act in the state (by which, I mean, have the perception
of Pleasure) quickly, is not possible. And how can it be a Generation?
because, according to notions generally held, not _any_thing is
generated from _any_thing, but a thing resolves itself into that out
of which it was generated: whereas of that of which Pleasure is a
Generation Pain is a Destruction.

Again, they say that Pain is a lack of something suitable to nature and
Pleasure a supply of it.

But these are affections of the body: now if Pleasure really is a
supplying of somewhat suitable to nature, that must feel the Pleasure in
which the supply takes place, therefore the body of course: yet this
is not thought to be so: neither then is Pleasure a supplying, only a
person of course will be pleased when a supply takes place just as he
will be pained when he is cut.

This notion would seem to have arisen out of the Pains and Pleasures
connected with natural nourishment; because, when people have felt a
lack and so have had Pain first, they, of course, are pleased with the
supply of their lack.

But this is not the case with all Pleasures: those attendant on
mathematical studies, for instance, are unconnected with any Pain; and
of such as attend on the senses those which arise through the sense of
Smell; and again, many sounds, and sights, and memories, and hopes: now
of what can these be Generations? because there has been here no lack of
anything to be afterwards supplied.

And to those who bring forward disgraceful Pleasures we may reply that
these are not really pleasant things; for it does not follow because
they are pleasant to the ill-disposed that we are to admit that they are
pleasant except to them; just as we should not say that those things
are really wholesome, or sweet, or bitter, which are so to the sick,
or those objects really white which give that impression to people
labouring under ophthalmia.

Or we might say thus, that the Pleasures are choiceworthy but not as
derived from these sources: just as wealth is, but not as the price of
treason; or health, but not on the terms of eating anything however
loathsome. Or again, may we not say that Pleasures differ in kind? those
derived from honourable objects, for instance are different from those
arising from disgraceful ones; and it is not possible to experience
the Pleasure of the just man without being just, or of the musical man
without being musical; and so on of others.

The distinction commonly drawn between the friend and the flatterer
would seem to show clearly either that Pleasure is not a good, or that
there are different kinds of Pleasure: for the former is thought to have
good as the object of his intercourse, the latter Pleasure only; and
this last is reproached, but the former men praise as having different
objects in his intercourse.

[Sidenote: 1174a]

Again, no one would choose to live with a child's intellect all his
life through, though receiving the highest possible Pleasure from such
objects as children receive it from; or to take Pleasure in doing any of
the most disgraceful things, though sure never to be pained.

There are many things also about which we should be diligent even though
they brought no Pleasure; as seeing, remembering, knowing, possessing
the various Excellences; and the fact that Pleasures do follow on these
naturally makes no difference, because we should certainly choose them
even though no Pleasure resulted from them.

It seems then to be plain that Pleasure is not the Chief Good, nor is
every kind of it choiceworthy: and that there are some choiceworthy in
themselves, differing in kind, _i.e._ in the sources from which they
are derived. Let this then suffice by way of an account of the current
maxims respecting Pleasure and Pain.

[Sidenote: IV]

Now what it is, and how characterised, will be more plain if we take up
the subject afresh.

An act of Sight is thought to be complete at any moment; that is to say,
it lacks nothing the accession of which subsequently will complete its
whole nature.

Well, Pleasure resembles this: because it is a whole, as one may say;
and one could not at any moment of time take a Pleasure whose whole
nature would be completed by its lasting for a longer time. And for this
reason it is not a Movement: for all Movement takes place in time of
certain duration and has a certain End to accomplish; for instance, the
Movement of house-building is then only complete when the builder has
produced what he intended, that is, either in the whole time [necessary
to complete the whole design], or in a given portion. But all the
subordinate Movements are incomplete in the parts of the time, and are
different in kind from the whole movement and from one another (I
mean, for instance, that the fitting the stones together is a Movement
different from that of fluting the column, and both again from the
construction of the Temple as a whole: but this last is complete as
lacking nothing to the result proposed; whereas that of the basement,
or of the triglyph, is incomplete, because each is a Movement of a part
merely).

As I said then, they differ in kind, and you cannot at any time you
choose find a Movement complete in its whole nature, but, if at all, in
the whole time requisite.

[Sidenote: 1174_b_]

And so it is with the Movement of walking and all others: for, if motion
be a Movement from one place to another place, then of it too there are
different kinds, flying, walking, leaping, and such-like. And not only
so, but there are different kinds even in walking: the where-from and
where-to are not the same in the whole Course as in a portion of it;
nor in one portion as in another; nor is crossing this line the same as
crossing that: because a man is not merely crossing a line but a line in
a given place, and this is in a different place from that.

Of Movement I have discoursed exactly in another treatise. I will now
therefore only say that it seems not to be complete at any given moment;
and that most movements are incomplete and specifically different, since
the whence and whither constitute different species.

But of Pleasure the whole nature is complete at any given moment: it
is plain then that Pleasure and Movement must be different from one
another, and that Pleasure belongs to the class of things whole and
complete. And this might appear also from the impossibility of moving
except in a definite time, whereas there is none with respect to the
sensation of Pleasure, for what exists at the very present moment is a
kind of "whole."

From these considerations then it is plain that people are not warranted
in saying that Pleasure is a Movement or a Generation: because these
terms are not applicable to all things, only to such as are divisible
and not "wholes:" I mean that of an act of Sight there is no Generation,
nor is there of a point, nor of a monad, nor is any one of these a
Movement or a Generation: neither then of Pleasure is there Movement or
Generation, because it is, as one may say, "a whole."

Now since every Percipient Faculty works upon the Object answering to
it, and perfectly the Faculty in a good state upon the most excellent of
the Objects within its range (for Perfect Working is thought to be much
what I have described; and we will not raise any question about saying
"the Faculty" works, instead of, "that subject wherein the Faculty
resides"), in each case the best Working is that of the Faculty in its
best state upon the best of the Objects answering to it. And this will
be, further, most perfect and most pleasant: for Pleasure is attendant
upon every Percipient Faculty, and in like manner on every intellectual
operation and speculation; and that is most pleasant which is most
perfect, and that most perfect which is the Working of the best Faculty
upon the most excellent of the Objects within its range.

And Pleasure perfects the Working. But Pleasure does not perfect it in
the same way as the Faculty and Object of Perception do, being good;
just as health and the physician are not in similar senses causes of a
healthy state.

And that Pleasure does arise upon the exercise of every Percipient
Faculty is evident, for we commonly say that sights and sounds are
pleasant; it is plain also that this is especially the case when the
Faculty is most excellent and works upon a similar Object: and when both
the Object and Faculty of Perception are such, Pleasure will always
exist, supposing of course an agent and a patient.

[Sidenote: 1175_a_]

Furthermore, Pleasure perfects the act of Working not in the way of an
inherent state but as a supervening finish, such as is bloom in people
at their prime. Therefore so long as the Object of intellectual or
sensitive Perception is such as it should be and also the Faculty which
discerns or realises the Object, there will be Pleasure in the Working:
because when that which has the capacity of being acted on and that
which is apt to act are alike and similarly related, the same result
follows naturally.

How is it then that no one feels Pleasure continuously? is it not that
he wearies, because all human faculties are incapable of unintermitting
exertion; and so, of course, Pleasure does not arise either, because
that follows upon the act of Working. But there are some things which
please when new, but afterwards not in the like way, for exactly the
same reason: that at first the mind is roused and works on these Objects
with its powers at full tension; just as they who are gazing stedfastly
at anything; but afterwards the act of Working is not of the kind it was
at first, but careless, and so the Pleasure too is dulled.

Again, a person may conclude that all men grasp at Pleasure, because all
aim likewise at Life and Life is an act of Working, and every man works
at and with those things which also he best likes; the musical man, for
instance, works with his hearing at music; the studious man with his
intellect at speculative questions, and so forth. And Pleasure perfects
the acts of Working, and so Life after which men grasp. No wonder then
that they aim also at Pleasure, because to each it perfects Life, which
is itself choiceworthy. (We will take leave to omit the question whether
we choose Life for Pleasure's sake of Pleasure for Life's sake; because
these two plainly are closely connected and admit not of separation;
since Pleasure comes not into being without Working, and again, every
Working Pleasure perfects.)

And this is one reason why Pleasures are thought to differ in kind,
because we suppose that things which differ in kind must be perfected by
things so differing: it plainly being the case with the productions of
Nature and Art; as animals, and trees, and pictures, and statues, and
houses, and furniture; and so we suppose that in like manner acts of
Working which are different in kind are perfected by things differing in
kind. Now Intellectual Workings differ specifically from those of the
Senses, and these last from one another; therefore so do the Pleasures
which perfect them.

This may be shown also from the intimate connection subsisting between
each Pleasure and the Working which it perfects: I mean, that the
Pleasure proper to any Working increases that Working; for they who
work with Pleasure sift all things more closely and carry them out to a
greater degree of nicety; for instance, those men become geometricians
who take Pleasure in geometry, and they apprehend particular points more
completely: in like manner men who are fond of music, or architecture,
or anything else, improve each on his own pursuit, because they feel
Pleasure in them. Thus the Pleasures aid in increasing the Workings, and
things which do so aid are proper and peculiar: but the things which are
proper and peculiar to others specifically different are themselves also
specifically different.

Yet even more clearly may this be shown from the fact that the Pleasures
arising from one kind of Workings hinder other Workings; for instance,
people who are fond of flute-music cannot keep their attention to
conversation or discourse when they catch the sound of a flute; because
they take more Pleasure in flute-playing than in the Working they are
at the time engaged on; in other words, the Pleasure attendant on
flute-playing destroys the Working of conversation or discourse. Much
the same kind of thing takes place in other cases, when a person is
engaged in two different Workings at the same time: that is, the
pleasanter of the two keeps pushing out the other, and, if the disparity
in pleasantness be great, then more and more till a man even ceases
altogether to work at the other.

This is the reason why, when we are very much pleased with anything
whatever, we do nothing else, and it is only when we are but moderately
pleased with one occupation that we vary it with another: people,
for instance, who eat sweetmeats in the theatre do so most when the
performance is indifferent.

Since then the proper and peculiar Pleasure gives accuracy to the
Workings and makes them more enduring and better of their kind, while
those Pleasures which are foreign to them mar them, it is plain there
is a wide difference between them: in fact, Pleasures foreign to any
Working have pretty much the same effect as the Pains proper to it,
which, in fact, destroy the Workings; I mean, if one man dislikes
writing, or another calculation, the one does not write, the other does
not calculate; because, in each case, the Working is attended with some
Pain: so then contrary effects are produced upon the Workings by the
Pleasures and Pains proper to them, by which I mean those which arise
upon the Working, in itself, independently of any other circumstances.
As for the Pleasures foreign to a Working, we have said already that
they produce a similar effect to the Pain proper to it; that is they
destroy the Working, only not in like way.

Well then, as Workings differ from one another in goodness and badness,
some being fit objects of choice, others of avoidance, and others in
their nature indifferent, Pleasures are similarly related; since its own
proper Pleasure attends or each Working: of course that proper to a good
Working is good, that proper to a bad, bad: for even the desires for
what is noble are praiseworthy, and for what is base blameworthy.

Furthermore, the Pleasures attendant on Workings are more closely
connected with them even than the desires after them: for these last
are separate both in time and nature, but the former are close to the
Workings, and so indivisible from them as to raise a question whether
the Working and the Pleasure are identical; but Pleasure does not seem
to be an Intellectual Operation nor a Faculty of Perception, because
that is absurd; but yet it gives some the impression of being the same
from not being separated from these.

As then the Workings are different so are their Pleasures; now Sight
differs from Touch in purity, and Hearing and Smelling from Taste;
therefore, in like manner, do their Pleasures; and again, Intellectual
Pleasures from these Sensual, and the different kinds both of
Intellectual and Sensual from one another.

It is thought, moreover, that each animal has a Pleasure proper to
itself, as it has a proper Work; that Pleasure of course which is
attendant on the Working. And the soundness of this will appear upon
particular inspection: for horse, dog, and man have different Pleasures;
as Heraclitus says, an ass would sooner have hay than gold; in other
words, provender is pleasanter to asses than gold. So then the Pleasures
of animals specifically different are also specifically different, but
those of the same, we may reasonably suppose, are without difference.

Yet in the case of human creatures they differ not a little: for the
very same things please some and pain others: and what are painful and
hateful to some are pleasant to and liked by others. The same is the
case with sweet things: the same will not seem so to the man in a fever
as to him who is in health: nor will the invalid and the person in
robust health have the same notion of warmth. The same is the case with
other things also.

Now in all such cases that is held to _be_ which impresses the good man
with the notion of being such and such; and if this is a second maxim
(as it is usually held to be), and Virtue, that is, the Good man, in
that he is such, is the measure of everything, then those must be real
Pleasures which gave him the impression of being so and those things
pleasant in which he takes Pleasure. Nor is it at all astonishing that
what are to him unpleasant should give another person the impression of
being pleasant, for men are liable to many corruptions and marrings; and
the things in question are not pleasant really, only to these particular
persons, and to them only as being thus disposed.

Well of course, you may say, it is obvious that we must assert those
which are confessedly disgraceful to be real Pleasures, except to
depraved tastes: but of those which are thought to be good what kind,
or which, must we say is _The Pleasure of Man?_ is not the answer plain
from considering the Workings, because the Pleasures follow upon these?

Whether then there be one or several Workings which belong to the
perfect and blessed man, the Pleasures which perfect these Workings must
be said to be specially and properly _The Pleasures of Man;_ and all
the rest in a secondary sense, and in various degrees according as the
Workings are related to those highest and best ones.


VI

Now that we have spoken about the Excellences of both kinds, and
Friendship in its varieties, and Pleasures, it remains to sketch out
Happiness, since we assume that to be the one End of all human things:
and we shall save time and trouble by recapitulating what was stated
before.

[Sidenote: 1176b] Well then, we said that it is not a State merely;
because, if it were, it might belong to one who slept all his life
through and merely vegetated, or to one who fell into very great
calamities: and so, if these possibilities displease us and we would
rather put it into the rank of some kind of Working (as was also said
before), and Workings are of different kinds (some being necessary
and choiceworthy with a view to other things, while others are so in
themselves), it is plain we must rank Happiness among those choiceworthy
for their own sakes and not among those which are so with a view to
something further: because Happiness has no lack of anything but is
self-sufficient.

By choiceworthy in themselves are meant those from which nothing is
sought beyond the act of Working: and of this kind are thought to be the
actions according to Virtue, because doing what is noble and excellent
is one of those things which are choiceworthy for their own sake alone.

And again, such amusements as are pleasant; because people do not choose
them with any further purpose: in fact they receive more harm than
profit from them, neglecting their persons and their property. Still the
common run of those who are judged happy take refuge in such pastimes,
which is the reason why they who have varied talent in such are highly
esteemed among despots; because they make themselves pleasant in those
things which these aim at, and these accordingly want such men.

Now these things are thought to be appurtenances of Happiness because
men in power spend their leisure herein: yet, it may be, we cannot
argue from the example of such men: because there is neither Virtue nor
Intellect necessarily involved in having power, and yet these are the
only sources of good Workings: nor does it follow that because these
men, never having tasted pure and generous Pleasure, take refuge in
bodily ones, we are therefore to believe them to be more choiceworthy:
for children too believe that those things are most excellent which are
precious in their eyes.

We may well believe that as children and men have different ideas as to
what is precious so too have the bad and the good: therefore, as we have
many times said, those things are really precious and pleasant which
seem so to the good man: and as to each individual that Working is most
choiceworthy which is in accordance with his own state to the good man
that is so which is in accordance with Virtue.

Happiness then stands not in amusement; in fact the very notion is
absurd of the End being amusement, and of one's toiling and enduring
hardness all one's life long with a view to amusement: for everything in
the world, so to speak, we choose with some further End in view, except
Happiness, for that is the End comprehending all others. Now to take
pains and to labour with a view to amusement is plainly foolish and
very childish: but to amuse one's self with a view to steady employment
afterwards, as Anacharsis says, is thought to be right: for amusement is
like rest, and men want rest because unable to labour continuously.

Rest, therefore, is not an End, because it is adopted with a view to
Working afterwards.

[Sidenote: 1177a] Again, it is held that the Happy Life must be one in
the way of Excellence, and this is accompanied by earnestness and stands
not in amusement. Moreover those things which are done in earnest, we
say, are better than things merely ludicrous and joined with amusement:
and we say that the Working of the better part, or the better man, is
more earnest; and the Working of the better is at once better and more
capable of Happiness.

Then, again, as for bodily Pleasures, any ordinary person, or even
a slave, might enjoy them, just as well as the best man living but
Happiness no one supposes a slave to share except so far as it is
implied in life: because Happiness stands not in such pastimes but in
the Workings in the way of Excellence, as has also been stated before.


VII

Now if Happiness is a Working in the way of Excellence of course that
Excellence must be the highest, that is to say, the Excellence of the
best Principle. Whether then this best Principle is Intellect or some
other which is thought naturally to rule and to lead and to conceive of
noble and divine things, whether being in its own nature divine or the
most divine of all our internal Principles, the Working of this in
accordance with its own proper Excellence must be the perfect Happiness.

That it is Contemplative has been already stated: and this would seem to
be consistent with what we said before and with truth: for, in the first
place, this Working is of the highest kind, since the Intellect is the
highest of our internal Principles and the subjects with which it
is conversant the highest of all which fall within the range of our
knowledge.

Next, it is also most Continuous: for we are better able to contemplate
than to do anything else whatever, continuously.

Again, we think Pleasure must be in some way an ingredient in Happiness,
and of all Workings in accordance with Excellence that in the way of
Science is confessedly most pleasant: at least the pursuit of Science is
thought to contain Pleasures admirable for purity and permanence; and it
is reasonable to suppose that the employment is more pleasant to those
who have mastered, than to those who are yet seeking for, it.

And the Self-Sufficiency which people speak of will attach chiefly to
the Contemplative Working: of course the actual necessaries of life are
needed alike by the man of science, and the just man, and all the other
characters; but, supposing all sufficiently supplied with these, the
just man needs people towards whom, and in concert with whom, to
practise his justice; and in like manner the man of perfected
self-mastery, and the brave man, and so on of the rest; whereas the man
of science can contemplate and speculate even when quite alone, and the
more entirely he deserves the appellation the more able is he to do so:
it may be he can do better for having fellow-workers but still he is
certainly most Self-Sufficient.

[Sidenote: 1177b] Again, this alone would seem to be rested in for
its own sake, since nothing results from it beyond the fact of having
contemplated; whereas from all things which are objects of moral action
we do mean to get something beside the doing them, be the same more or
less.

Also, Happiness is thought to stand in perfect rest; for we toil that we
may rest, and war that we may be at peace. Now all the Practical Virtues
require either society or war for their Working, and the actions
regarding these are thought to exclude rest; those of war entirely,
because no one chooses war, nor prepares for war, for war's sake: he
would indeed be thought a bloodthirsty villain who should make enemies
of his friends to secure the existence of fighting and bloodshed. The
Working also of the statesman excludes the idea of rest, and, beside the
actual work of government, seeks for power and dignities or at least
Happiness for the man himself and his fellow-citizens: a Happiness
distinct the national Happiness which we evidently seek as being
different and distinct.

If then of all the actions in accordance with the various virtues those
of policy and war are pre-eminent in honour and greatness, and these are
restless, and aim at some further End and are not choiceworthy for
their own sakes, but the Working of the Intellect, being apt for
contemplation, is thought to excel in earnestness, and to aim at no End
beyond itself and to have Pleasure of its own which helps to increase
the Working, and if the attributes of Self-Sufficiency, and capacity of
rest, and unweariedness (as far as is compatible with the infirmity
of human nature), and all other attributes of the highest Happiness,
plainly belong to this Working, this must be perfect Happiness, if
attaining a complete duration of life, which condition is added because
none of the points of Happiness is incomplete.

But such a life will be higher than mere human nature, because a man
will live thus, not in so far as he is man but in so far as there is in
him a divine Principle: and in proportion as this Principle excels
his composite nature so far does the Working thereof excel that in
accordance with any other kind of Excellence: and therefore, if pure
Intellect, as compared with human nature, is divine, so too will the
life in accordance with it be divine compared with man's ordinary life.
[Sidenote: 1178a] Yet must we not give ear to those who bid one as man
to mind only man's affairs, or as mortal only mortal things; but, so far
as we can, make ourselves like immortals and do all with a view to
living in accordance with the highest Principle in us, for small as it
may be in bulk yet in power and preciousness it far more excels all the
others.

In fact this Principle would seem to constitute each man's "Self," since
it is supreme and above all others in goodness it _would_ be absurd then
for a man not to choose his own life but that of some other.

And here will apply an observation made before, that whatever is proper
to each is naturally best and pleasantest to him: such then is to Man
the life in accordance with pure Intellect (since this Principle is most
truly Man), and if so, then it is also the happiest.


VIII

And second in degree of Happiness will be that Life which is in
accordance with the other kind of Excellence, for the Workings in
accordance with this are proper to Man: I mean, we do actions of
justice, courage, and the other virtues, towards one another, in
contracts, services of different kinds, and in all kinds of actions and
feelings too, by observing what is befitting for each: and all these
plainly are proper to man. Further, the Excellence of the Moral
character is thought to result in some points from physical
circumstances, and to be, in many, very closely connected with the
passions.

Again, Practical Wisdom and Excellence of the Moral character are
very closely united; since the Principles of Practical Wisdom are in
accordance with the Moral Virtues and these are right when they accord
with Practical Wisdom.

These moreover, as bound up with the passions, must belong to the
composite nature, and the Excellences or Virtues of the composite nature
are proper to man: therefore so too will be the life and Happiness which
is in accordance with them. But that of the Pure Intellect is separate
and distinct: and let this suffice upon the subject, since great
exactness is beyond our purpose,

It would seem, moreover, to require supply of external goods to a small
degree, or certainly less than the Moral Happiness: for, as far as
necessaries of life are concerned, we will suppose both characters to
need them equally (though, in point of fact, the man who lives in
society does take more pains about his person and all that kind of
thing; there will really be some little difference), but when we come to
consider their Workings there will be found a great difference.

I mean, the liberal man must have money to do his liberal actions with,
and the just man to meet his engagements (for mere intentions
are uncertain, and even those who are unjust make a pretence of
_wishing_ to do justly), and the brave man must have power, if
he is to perform any of the actions which appertain to his particular
Virtue, and the man of perfected self-mastery must have opportunity of
temptation, else how shall he or any of the others display his real
character?

[Sidenote: 1178b]

(By the way, a question is sometimes raised, whether the moral choice or
the actions have most to do with Virtue, since it consists in both: it
is plain that the perfection of virtuous action requires both: but for
the actions many things are required, and the greater and more numerous
they are the more.) But as for the man engaged in Contemplative
Speculation, not only are such things unnecessary for his Working, but,
so to speak, they are even hindrances: as regards the Contemplation at
least; because of course in so far as he is Man and lives in society he
chooses to do what Virtue requires, and so he will need such things
for maintaining his character as Man though not as a speculative
philosopher.

And that the perfect Happiness must be a kind of Contemplative Working
may appear also from the following consideration: our conception of the
gods is that they are above all blessed and happy: now what kind of
Moral actions are we to attribute to them? those of justice? nay,
will they not be set in a ridiculous light if represented as forming
contracts, and restoring deposits, and so on? well then, shall we
picture them performing brave actions, withstanding objects of fear and
meeting dangers, because it is noble to do so? or liberal ones? but to
whom shall they be giving? and further, it is absurd to think they have
money or anything of the kind. And as for actions of perfected
self-mastery, what can theirs be? would it not be a degrading praise
that they have no bad desires? In short, if one followed the subject
into all details all the circumstances connected with Moral actions
would appear trivial and unworthy of gods.

Still, every one believes that they live, and therefore that they
Work because it is not supposed that they sleep their time away like
Endymion: now if from a living being you take away Action, still more
if Creation, what remains but Contemplation? So then the Working of
the Gods, eminent in blessedness, will be one apt for Contemplative
Speculation; and of all human Workings that will have the greatest
capacity for Happiness which is nearest akin to this.

A corroboration of which position is the fact that the other animals
do not partake of Happiness, being completely shut out from any such
Working.

To the gods then all their life is blessed; and to men in so far as
there is in it some copy of such Working, but of the other animals none
is happy because it in no way shares in Contemplative Speculation.

Happiness then is co-extensive with this Contemplative Speculation, and
in proportion as people have the act of Contemplation so far have they
also the being happy, not incidentally, but in the way of Contemplative
Speculation because it is in itself precious.

So Happiness must be a kind of Contemplative Speculation; but since it
is Man we are speaking of he will need likewise External Prosperity,
because his Nature is not by itself sufficient for Speculation, but
there must be health of body, and nourishment, and tendance of all
kinds.

[Sidenote: 1179a] However, it must not be thought, because without
external goods a man cannot enjoy high Happiness, that therefore he
will require many and great goods in order to be happy: for neither
Self-sufficiency, nor Action, stand in Excess, and it is quite possible
to act nobly without being ruler of sea and land, since even with
moderate means a man may act in accordance with Virtue.

And this may be clearly seen in that men in private stations are thought
to act justly, not merely no less than men in power but even more: it
will be quite enough that just so much should belong to a man as is
necessary, for his life will be happy who works in accordance with
Virtue.

Solon perhaps drew a fair picture of the Happy, when he said that they
are men moderately supplied with external goods, and who have achieved
the most noble deeds, as he thought, and who have lived with perfect
self-mastery: for it is quite possible for men of moderate means to act
as they ought.

Anaxagoras also seems to have conceived of the Happy man not as either
rich or powerful, saying that he should not wonder if he were accounted
a strange man in the judgment of the multitude: for they judge by
outward circumstances of which alone they have any perception.

And thus the opinions of the Wise seem to be accordant with our account
of the matter: of course such things carry some weight, but truth, in
matters of moral action, is judged from facts and from actual life,
for herein rests the decision. So what we should do is to examine the
preceding statements by referring them to facts and to actual life, and
when they harmonise with facts we may accept them, when they are at
variance with them conceive of them as mere theories.

Now he that works in accordance with, and pays observance to, Pure
Intellect, and tends this, seems likely to be both in the best frame of
mind and dearest to the Gods: because if, as is thought, any care is
bestowed on human things by the Gods then it must be reasonable to think
that they take pleasure in what is best and most akin to themselves (and
this must be the Pure Intellect); and that they requite with kindness
those who love and honour this most, as paying observance to what is
dear to them, and as acting rightly and nobly. And it is quite obvious
that the man of Science chiefly combines all these: he is therefore
dearest to the Gods, and it is probable that he is at the same time most
Happy.

Thus then on this view also the man of Science will be most Happy.



IX

Now then that we have said enough in our sketchy kind of way
on these subjects; I mean, on the Virtues, and also on Friendship and
Pleasure; are we to suppose that our original purpose is completed? Must
we not rather acknowledge, what is commonly said, that in matters of
moral action mere Speculation and Knowledge is not the real End but
rather Practice: and if so, then neither in respect of Virtue is
Knowledge enough; we must further strive to have and exert it, and take
whatever other means there are of becoming good.

Now if talking and writing were of themselves sufficient to make men
good, they would justly, as Theognis observes have reaped numerous and
great rewards, and the thing to do would be to provide them: but in
point of fact, while they plainly have the power to guide and stimulate
the generous among the young and to base upon true virtuous principle
any noble and truly high-minded disposition, they as plainly are
powerless to guide the mass of men to Virtue and goodness; because it is
not their nature to be amenable to a sense of shame but only to fear;
nor to abstain from what is low and mean because it is disgraceful to do
it but because of the punishment attached to it: in fact, as they live
at the beck and call of passion, they pursue their own proper pleasures
and the means of securing them, and they avoid the contrary pains; but
as for what is noble and truly pleasurable they have not an idea of it,
inasmuch as they have never tasted of it.

Men such as these then what mere words can transform? No, indeed! it is
either actually impossible, or a task of no mean difficulty, to alter by
words what has been of old taken into men's very dispositions: and,
it may be, it is a ground for contentment if with all the means and
appliances for goodness in our hands we can attain to Virtue.

The formation of a virtuous character some ascribe to Nature, some to
Custom, and some to Teaching. Now Nature's part, be it what it may,
obviously does not rest with us, but belongs to those who in the truest
sense are fortunate, by reason of certain divine agency,

Then, as for Words and Precept, they, it is to be feared, will not avail
with all; but it may be necessary for the mind of the disciple to have
been previously prepared for liking and disliking as he ought; just as
the soil must, to nourish the seed sown. For he that lives in obedience
to passion cannot hear any advice that would dissuade him, nor, if he
heard, understand: now him that is thus how can one reform? in fact,
generally, passion is not thought to yield to Reason but to brute force.
So then there must be, to begin with, a kind of affinity to Virtue in
the disposition; which must cleave to what is honourable and loath
what is disgraceful. But to get right guidance towards Virtue from the
earliest youth is not easy unless one is brought up under laws of such
kind; because living with self-mastery and endurance is not pleasant to
the mass of men, and specially not to the young. For this reason the
food, and manner of living generally, ought to be the subject of
legal regulation, because things when become habitual will not be
disagreeable.

[Sidenote: 1180_a_] Yet perhaps it is not sufficient that men while
young should get right food and tendance, but, inasmuch as they will
have to practise and become accustomed to certain things even after they
have attained to man's estate, we shall want laws on these points as
well, and, in fine, respecting one's whole life, since the mass of men
are amenable to compulsion rather than Reason, and to punishment rather
than to a sense of honour.

And therefore some men hold that while lawgivers should employ the sense
of honour to exhort and guide men to Virtue, under the notion that they
will then obey who have been well trained in habits; they should
impose chastisement and penalties on those who disobey and are of less
promising nature; and the incurable expel entirely: because the good man
and he who lives under a sense of honour will be obedient to reason;
and the baser sort, who grasp at pleasure, will be kept in check, like
beasts of burthen by pain. Therefore also they say that the pains should
be such as are most contrary to the pleasures which are liked.

As has been said already, he who is to be good must have been brought up
and habituated well, and then live accordingly under good institutions,
and never do what is low and mean, either against or with his will. Now
these objects can be attained only by men living in accordance with some
guiding Intellect and right order, with power to back them.

As for the Paternal Rule, it possesses neither strength nor compulsory
power, nor in fact does the Rule of any one man, unless he is a king or
some one in like case: but the Law has power to compel, since it is a
declaration emanating from Practical Wisdom and Intellect. And people
feel enmity towards their fellow-men who oppose their impulses, however
rightly they may do so: the Law, on the contrary, is not the object of
hatred, though enforcing right rules.

The Lacedæmonian is nearly the only State in which the framer of the
Constitution has made any provision, it would seem, respecting the food
and manner of living of the people: in most States these points are
entirely neglected, and each man lives just as he likes, ruling his wife
and children Cyclops-Fashion.

Of course, the best thing would be that there should be a right Public
System and that we should be able to carry it out: but, since as a
public matter those points are neglected, the duty would seem to devolve
upon each individual to contribute to the cause of Virtue with his own
children and friends, or at least to make this his aim and purpose: and
this, it would seem, from what has been said, he will be best able to do
by making a Legislator of himself: since all public *[Sidenote: 1180_b_]
systems, it is plain, are formed by the instrumentality of laws and
those are good which are formed by that of good laws: whether they are
written or unwritten, whether they are applied to the training of one or
many, will not, it seems, make any difference, just as it does not in
music, gymnastics, or any other such accomplishments, which are gained
by practice.

For just as in Communities laws and customs prevail, so too in families
the express commands of the Head, and customs also: and even more in the
latter, because of blood-relationship and the benefits conferred:
for there you have, to begin with, people who have affection and are
naturally obedient to the authority which controls them.

Then, furthermore, Private training has advantages over Public, as in
the case of the healing art: for instance, as a general rule, a man who
is in a fever should keep quiet, and starve; but in a particular case,
perhaps, this may not hold good; or, to take a different illustration,
the boxer will not use the same way of fighting with all antagonists.

It would seem then that the individual will be most exactly attended to
under Private care, because so each will be more likely to obtain what
is expedient for him. Of course, whether in the art of healing, or
gymnastics, or any other, a man will treat individual cases the better
for being acquainted with general rules; as, "that so and so is good for
all, or for men in such and such cases:" because general maxims are not
only said to be but are the object-matter of sciences: still this is no
reason against the possibility of a man's taking excellent care of
some _one_ case, though he possesses no scientific knowledge but from
experience is exactly acquainted with what happens in each point; just
as some people are thought to doctor themselves best though they would
be wholly unable to administer relief to others. Yet it may seem to be
necessary nevertheless, for one who wishes to become a real artist and
well acquainted with the theory of his profession, to have recourse
to general principles and ascertain all their capacities: for we have
already stated that these are the object-matter of sciences.

If then it appears that we may become good through the instrumentality
of laws, of course whoso wishes to make men better by a system of care
and training must try to make a Legislator of himself; for to treat
skilfully just any one who may be put before you is not what any
ordinary person can do, but, if any one, he who has knowledge; as in the
healing art, and all others which involve careful practice and skill.

[Sidenote: 1181_a_] Will not then our next business be to inquire from
what sources, or how one may acquire this faculty of Legislation; or
shall we say, that, as in similar cases, Statesmen are the people to
learn from, since this faculty was thought to be a part of the Social
Science? Must we not admit that the Political Science plainly does not
stand on a similar footing to that of other sciences and faculties? I
mean, that while in all other cases those who impart the faculties
and themselves exert them are identical (physicians and painters for
instance) matters of Statesmanship the Sophists profess to teach, but
not one of them practises it, that being left to those actually engaged
in it: and these might really very well be thought to do it by some
singular knack and by mere practice rather than by any intellectual
process: for they neither write nor speak on these matters (though it
might be more to their credit than composing speeches for the courts or
the assembly), nor again have they made Statesmen of their own sons or
their friends.

One can hardly suppose but that they would have done so if they could,
seeing that they could have bequeathed no more precious legacy to their
communities, nor would they have preferred, for themselves or their
dearest friends, the possession of any faculty rather than this.

Practice, however, seems to contribute no little to its acquisition;
merely breathing the atmosphere of politics would never have made
Statesmen of them, and therefore we may conclude that they who would
acquire a knowledge of Statesmanship must have in addition practice.

But of the Sophists they who profess to teach it are plainly a long way
off from doing so: in fact, they have no knowledge at all of its nature
and objects; if they had, they would never have put it on the same
footing with Rhetoric or even on a lower: neither would they have
conceived it to be "an easy matter to legislate by simply collecting
such laws as are famous because of course one could select the best," as
though the selection were not a matter of skill, and the judging aright
a very great matter, as in Music: for they alone, who have practical
knowledge of a thing, can judge the performances rightly or understand
with what means and in what way they are accomplished, and what
harmonises with what: the unlearned must be content with being able to
discover whether the result is good or bad, as in painting.

[Sidenote: 1181_b_] Now laws may be called the performances or tangible
results of Political Science; how then can a man acquire from these
the faculty of Legislation, or choose the best? we do not see men made
physicians by compilations: and yet in these treatises men endeavour to
give not only the cases but also how they may be cured, and the proper
treatment in each case, dividing the various bodily habits. Well, these
are thought to be useful to professional men, but to the unprofessional
useless. In like manner it may be that collections of laws and
Constitutions would be exceedingly useful to such as are able to
speculate on them, and judge what is well, and what ill, and what
kind of things fit in with what others: but they who without this
qualification should go through such matters cannot have right judgment,
unless they have it by instinct, though they may become more intelligent
in such matters.

Since then those who have preceded us have left uninvestigated the
subject of Legislation, it will be better perhaps for us to investigate
it ourselves, and, in fact, the whole subject of Polity, that thus what
we may call Human Philosophy may be completed as far as in us lies.

First then, let us endeavour to get whatever fragments of good there may
be in the statements of our predecessors, next, from the Polities we
have collected, ascertain what kind of things preserve or destroy
Communities, and what, particular Constitutions; and the cause why some
are well and others ill managed, for after such inquiry, we shall be the
better able to take a concentrated view as to what kind of Constitution
is best, what kind of regulations are best for each, and what laws and
customs.

To this let us now proceed.



NOTES


P 2, l. 16. For this term, as here employed, our language contains no
equivalent expression except an inconvenient paraphrase.

There are three senses which it bears in this treatise: the first (in
which it is here employed) is its strict etymological signfication "The
science of Society," and this includes everything which can bear at
all upon the well-being of Man in his social capacity, "Quicquid agunt
homines nostri est farrago libelli." It is in this view that it is
fairly denominated most commanding and inclusive.

The second sense (in which it occurs next, just below) is "Moral
Philosophy." Aristotle explains the term in this sense in the
Rhetoric (1 2) [Greek: hae peri ta aethae pragmateia aen dikaion esti
prosagoreuen politikaen]. He has principally in view in this treatise
the moral training of the Individual, the branch of the Science of
Society which we call Ethics Proper, bearing the same relation to the
larger Science as the hewing and squaring of the stones to the building
of the Temple, or the drill of the Recruit to the manoeuvres of the
field. Greek Philosophy viewed men principally as constituent parts of
a [Greek: polis], considering this function to be the real End of each,
and this state as that in which the Individual attained his highest and
most complete development.

The third sense is "The detail of Civil Government," which Aristotle
expressly states (vi. 8) was the most common acceptation of the term.

P 3, l. 23. Matters of which a man is to judge either belong to some
definite art or science, or they do not. In the former case he is the
best judge who has thorough acquaintance with that art or science, in
the latter, the man whose powers have been developed and matured by
education. A lame horse one would show to a farmer, not to the best and
wisest man of one's acquaintance; to the latter, one would apply in a
difficult case of conduct.

Experience answers to the first, a state of self-control to the latter.

P 3, l. 35. In the last chapter of the third book of this treatise it is
said of the fool, that his desire of pleasure is not only insatiable,
but indiscriminate in its objects, [Greek: pantachothen].

P 4, l. 30. [Greek: 'Archae] is a word used in this treatise in various
significations. The primary one is "beginning or first cause," and this
runs through all its various uses.

"Rule," and sometimes "Rulers," are denoted by this term the initiative
being a property of Rule.

"Principle" is a very usual signification of it, and in fact the most
characteristic of the Ethics. The word Principle means "starting-point."
Every action has two beginnings, that of Resolve ([Greek: ou eneka]), and
that of Action ([Greek: othen ae kenaesis]). I desire praise of men this
then is the beginning of Resolve. Having considered how it is to be
attained, I resolve upon some course and this Resolve is the beginning
of Action.

The beginnings of Resolve, '[Greek: Archai] or Motives, when formally
stated, are the major premisses of what Aristotle calls the [Greek:
sullagismoi ton prakton], i.e. the reasoning into which actions may be
analysed.

Thus we say that the desire of human praise was the motive of the
Pharisees, or the principle on which they acted.

Their practical syllogism then would stand thus:

  Whatever gains human praise is to be done;
  Public praying and almsgiving gave human praise:
  [ergo] Public praying and almsgiving are to be done.

The major premisses may be stored up in the mind as rules of action, and
this is what is commonly meant by having principles good or bad.

P. 5, l 1. The difficulty of this passage consists in determining the
signification of the terms [Greek: gnorima aemin] and [Greek: gnorima
aplos]

I have translated them without reference to their use elsewhere, as
denoting respectively what _is_ and what _may_ be known. All truth
is [Greek: gnorimon aplos], but that alone [Greek: aemin] which we
individually realise, therefore those principles alone are [Greek:
gnorima aemin] which _we have received as true_. From this appears
immediately the necessity of good training as preparatory to the study
of Moral Philosophy for good training in habits will either work
principles into our nature, or make us capable of accepting them as soon
as they are put before us; which no mere intellectual training can do.
The child who has been used to obey his parents may never have heard the
fifth Commandment but it is in the very texture of his nature, and the
first time he hears it he will recognise it as morally true and right
the principle is in his case a fact, the reason for which he is as
little inclined to ask as any one would be able to prove its truth if he
should ask.

But these terms are employed elsewhere (Analytica Post I cap. 11. sect.
10) to denote respectively particulars and universals The latter are so
denominated, because principles or laws must be supposed to have existed
before the instances of their operation. Justice must have existed
before just actions, Redness before red things, but since what we meet
with are the concrete instances (from which we gather the principles and
laws), the particulars are said to be [Greek: gnorimotera aemin]

Adopting this signification gives greater unity to the whole passage,
which will then stand thus. The question being whether we are to assume
principles, or obtain them by an analysis of facts, Aristotle says,
"We must begin of course with what is known but then this term denotes
either particulars or universals perhaps we then must begin with
particulars and hence the necessity of a previous good training in
habits, etc. (which of course is beginning with particular facts), for a
fact is a starting point, and if this be sufficiently clear, there will
be no want of the reason for the fact in addition"

The objection to this method of translation is, that [Greek: archai]
occurs immediately afterwards in the sense of "principles."

  Utere tuo judicio nihil enim impedio.

P 6, l. 1. Or "prove themselves good," as in the Prior Analytics, ii 25,
[Greek: apanta pisteuomen k.t l] but the other rendering is supported
by a passage in Book VIII. chap. ix. [Greek: oi d' upo ton epieikon kai
eidoton oregomenoi timaes bebaiosai ten oikeian doxan ephientai peri
auton chairousi de oti eisin agathoi, pisteuontes te ton legonton
krisei]

P 6, l. 11. [Greek: thesis] meant originally some paradoxical statement
by any philosopher of name enough to venture on one, but had come to
mean any dialectical question. Topics, I. chap. ix.

P 6, l. 13. A lost work, supposed to have been so called, because
containing miscellaneous questions.

P 6, l. 15. It is only quite at the close of the treatise that Aristotle
refers to this, and allows that [Greek: theoria] constitutes the highest
happiness because it is the exercise of the highest faculty in man the
reason of thus deferring the statement being that till the lower, that
is the moral, nature has been reduced to perfect order, [Greek: theoria]
cannot have place, though, had it been held out from the first, men
would have been for making the experiment at once, without the trouble
of self-discipline.

P 6, l. 22. Or, as some think, "many theories have been founded on
them."

P. 8, l. 1. The list ran thus--

  [Greek:
  to peras     to apeiron      |    to euthu
  to perisson  to artion       |    to phos
  to en        to plethos      |    to tetragonon
  to dexion    to aristeron    |    to aeremoun
  to arren     to thelu        |    to agathon
  ]

P 8, l. 2. Plato's sister's son.

P 9, l. 9. This is the capital defect in Aristotle's eyes, who being
eminently practical, could not like a theory which not only did not
necessarily lead to action, but had a tendency to discourage it by
enabling unreal men to talk finely. If true, the theory is merely a way
of stating facts, and leads to no action.

P. 10, l. 34. _i.e._ the identification of Happiness with the Chief
Good.

P. 11, l. 11. _i.e._ without the capability of addition.

P. 11, l. 14. And then Happiness would at once be shown not to be the
Chief Good. It is a contradiction in terms to speak of adding to the
Chief Good. See Book X. chap. 11. [Greek: delon os oud allo ouden
tagathon an eiae o meta tenos ton kath' auto agathon airetoteron
ginetai.]

P. 12, l. 9. _i.e._ as working or as quiescent.

P. 13, 1. 14. This principle is more fully stated, with illustrations,
in the Topics, I. chap. ix.

P. 13, l. 19. Either that of the bodily senses, or that of the moral
senses. "Fire burns," is an instance of the former, "Treason is odious,"
of the latter.

P. 14, l. 27. I have thought it worthwhile to vary the interpretation of
this word, because though "habitus" may be equivalent to all the senses
of [Greek: exis], "habit" is not, at least according to our colloquial
usage we commonly denote by "habit" a state formed by habituation.

P. 14, l. 35. Another and perhaps more obvious method of rendering this
passage is to apply [Greek: kalon kagathon] to things, and let them
depend grammatically on [Greek: epaeboli]. It is to be remembered,
however, that [Greek: kalos kagathos] bore a special and well-known
meaning also the comparison is in the text more complete, and the point
of the passage seems more completely brought out.

P. 15 l. 16. "Goodness always implies the love of itself, an affection
to goodness." (Bishop Butler, Sermon xiii ) Aristotle describes pleasure
in the Tenth Book of this Treatise as the result of any faculty of
perception meeting with the corresponding object, vicious pleasure being
as truly pleasure as the most refined and exalted. If Goodness then
implies the love of itself, the percipient will always have its object
present, and pleasure continually result.

P. 15, l. 32. In spite of theory, we know as a matter of fact that
external circumstances are necessary to complete the idea of Happiness
not that Happiness is capable of addition, but that when we assert it to
be identical with virtuous action we must understand that it is to have
a fair field; in fact, the other side of [Greek: bios teleios].

P. 16, l. 18. It is remarkable how Aristotle here again shelves what he
considers an unpractical question. If Happiness were really a direct
gift from Heaven, independently of human conduct, all motive to
self-discipline and moral improvement would vanish He shows therefore
that it is no depreciation of the value of Happiness to suppose it to
come partly at least from ourselves, and he then goes on with other
reasons why we should think with him.

P. 16, l. 26. This term is important, what has been maimed was once
perfect; he does not contemplate as possible the case of a man being
born incapable of virtue, and so of happiness.

P. 17, l. 3. But why give materials and instruments, if there is no work
to do?

P. 18, l. 6. The supposed pair of ancestors.

P. 18, l. 12. Solon says, "Call no man happy till he is dead." He must
mean either, The man when dead _is_ happy (a), or, The man when dead
_may be said to have been happy_ (b). If the former, does he mean
positive happiness (a)? or only freedom from unhappiness ([Greek: B])?
_We_ cannot allow (a), Men's opinions disallow ([Greek: B]), We revert
now to the consideration of (b).

P. 18, l. 36. The difficulty was raised by the clashing of a notion
commonly held, and a fact universally experienced. Most people conceive
that Happiness should be abiding, every one knows that fortune is
changeable. It is the notion which supports the definition, because we
have therein based Happiness on the most abiding cause.

P. 20, l. 12. The term seems to be employed advisedly. The Choragus, of
course, dressed his actors _for their parts;_ not according to their
fancies or his own.

Hooker has (E. P. v. ixxvi. 5) a passage which seems to be an admirable
paraphrase on this.

"Again, that the measure of our outward prosperity be taken by
proportion with that which every man's estate in this present life
requireth. External abilities are instruments of action. It contenteth
wise artificers to have their instruments proportionable to their work,
rather fit for use than huge and goodly to please the eye. Seeing then
the actions of a servant do not need that which may be necessary for men
of calling and place in the world, neither men of inferior condition
many things which greater personages can hardly want; surely they are
blessed in worldly respects who have wherewith to perform what their
station and place asketh, though they have no more."

P. 20, l. 18. Always bearing in mind that man "never continueth in one
stay."

P. 20, l. 11. The meaning is this: personal fortunes, we have said, must
be in certain weight and number to affect our own happiness, this will
be true, of course, of those which are reflected on us from our friends:
and these are the only ones to which the dead are supposed to be
liable? add then the difference of sensibility which it is fair to
presume, and there is a very small residuum of joy or sorrow.

P. 21, l. 18. This is meant for an exhaustive division of goods, which
are either so _in esse_ or _in posse_.

If _in esse_, they are either above praise, or subjects of praise. Those
_in posse_, here called faculties, are good only when rightly used. Thus
Rhetoric is a faculty which may be used to promote justice or abused to
support villainy. Money in like way.

P. 22, l. 4. Eudoxus, a philosopher holding the doctrine afterwards
adopted by Epicurus respecting pleasure, but (as Aristotle testifies in
the Tenth Book) of irreproachable character.

P. 22, l. 13. See the Rhetoric, Book I. chap ix.

P. 24, l. 23. The unseen is at least as real as the seen.

P. 24, l. 29. The terms are borrowed from the Seventh Book and are here
used in their strict philosophical meaning. The [Greek: enkrates] is he
who has bad or unruly appetites, but whose reason is strong enough to
keep them under. The [Greek: akrates] is he whose appetites constantly
prevail over his reason and previous good resolutions.

By the law of habits the former is constantly approximating to a state
in which the appetites are wholly quelled. This state is called [Greek:
sophrosyne], and the man in it [Greek: sophron]. By the same law the
remonstrances of reason in the latter grow fainter and fainter till they
are silenced for ever. This state is called [Greek: akolasia], and the
man in it [Greek: akolastos].

P. 25, l. 2. This is untranslateable. As the Greek phrase, [Greek:
echein logon tinos], really denotes substituting that person's [Greek:
logos] for one's own, so the Irrational nature in a man of self-control
or perfected self-mastery substitutes the orders of Reason for its own
impulses. The other phrase means the actual possession of mathematical
truths as part of the mental furniture, _i.e._ knowing them.

P 25, l. 16. [Greek: xin] may be taken as opposed to [Greek: energeian],
and the meaning will be, to show a difference between Moral and
Intellectual Excellences, that men are commended for merely having the
latter, but only for exerting and using the former.

P. 26, l. 2. Which we call simply virtue.

P. 26, l. 4. For nature must of course supply the capacity.

P. 26, l. 18. Or "as a simple result of nature."

P. 28, l. 12. This is done in the Sixth Book.

P. 28, l. 21. It is, in truth, in the application of rules to particular
details of practice that our moral Responsibility chiefly lies no rule
can be so framed, that evasion shall be impossible. See Bishop Butler's
Sermon on the character of Balaam, and that on Self-Deceit. P. 29, l.
32. The words [Greek: akolastos] and [Greek: deilos] are not used here
in their strict significations to denote confirmed states of vice the
[Greek: enkrates] necessarily feels pain, because he must always be
thwarting passions which are a real part of his nature, though this pain
will grow less and less as he nears the point of [Greek: sophrosyne] or
perfected Self-Mastery, which being attained the pain will then, and
then only, cease entirely. So a certain degree of fear is necessary to
the _formation_ of true courage. All that is meant here is, that no
habit of courage or self-mastery can be said to be matured, until pain
altogether vanishes.

P. 30, l. 18. Virtue consists in the due regulation of _all_ the parts
of our nature our passions are a real part of that nature, and as
such have their proper office, it is an error then to aim at their
extirpation. It is true that in a perfect moral state emotion will be
rare, but then this will have been gained by regular process, being the
legitimate result of the law that "passive impressions weaken as active
habits are strengthened, by repetition." If musical instruments are
making discord, I may silence or I may bring them into harmony in
either case I get rid of discord, but in the latter I have the positive
enjoyment of music. The Stoics would have the passions rooted out,
Aristotle would have them cultivated to use an apt figure (whose I know
not), They would pluck the blossom off at once, he would leave it to
fall in due course when the fruit was formed. Of them we might truly
say, _Solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant_. See on this point Bishop
Butler's fifth Sermon, and sect. 11. of the chapter on Moral Discipline
in the first part of his Analogy.

P. 32, l. 16. I have adopted this word from our old writers, because our
word _act_ is so commonly interchanged with _action_. [Greek: Praxis]
(action) properly denotes the whole process from the conception to the
performance. [Greek: Pragma] (fact) only the result. The latter may be
right when the former is wrong if, for example, a murderer was killed
by his accomplices. Again, the [Greek: praxis] may be _good_ though the
[Greek: pragma] be wrong, as if a man under erroneous impressions does
what would have been right if his impressions had been true (subject of
course to the question how far he is guiltless of his original error),
but in this case we could not call the [Greek: praxis] _right_. No
repetition of [Greek: pragmata] goes to form a habit. See Bishop Butler
on the Theory of Habits m the chapter on Moral Discipline, quoted above,
sect. 11. "And in like manner as habits belonging to the body," etc.

P. 32, l. 32. Being about to give a strict logical definition of Virtue,
Aristotle ascertains first what is its genus [Greek: ti estin].

P. 33, l. 15. That is, not for _merely having_ them, because we did not
make ourselves.

See Bishop Butler's account of our nature as containing "particular
propensions," in sect. iv. of the chapter on Moral discipline, and in
the Preface to the Sermons. P. 34, l. 14. This refers to the division of
quantity ([Greek: poson]) in the Categories. Those Quantities are called
by Aristotle Continuous whose parts have position relatively to one
another, as a line, surface, or solid, those discrete, whose parts
have no such relation, as numbers themselves, or any string of words
grammatically unconnected.

P. 34, l. 27. Numbers are in arithmetical proportion (more usually
called progression), when they increase or decrease by a common
difference thus, 2, 6, 10 are so, because 2 + 4 = 6, 6 + 4= 10, or _vice
versa_, 10 - 4 = 6, 6 - 4 = 2.

P. 36, l. 3. The two are necessary, because since the reason itself may
be perverted, a man must have recourse to an external standard; we may
suppose his [Greek: logos] originally to have been a sufficient guide,
but when he has injured his moral perceptions in any degree, he must go
out of himself for direction.

P. 37, l. 8. This is one of the many expressions which seem to imply
that this treatise is rather a collection of notes of a _viva voce_
lecture than a set formal treatise. "The table" of virtues and vices
probably was sketched out and exhibited to the audience.

P. 37,1. 23. Afterwards defined as "All things whose value is measured
by money"

P. 38, l. 8. We have no term exactly equivalent; it may be illustrated
by Horace's use of the term _hiatus_:

[Sidenote: A P 138] "Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?"
Opening the mouth wide gives a promise of something great to come,
if nothing great does come, this is a case of [Greek: chaunotes] or
fruitless and unmeaning _hiatus_; the transference to the present
subject is easy.

P. 38, l. 22. In like manner _we_ talk of laudable ambition, implying of
course there may be that which is not laudable.

P. 40, l. 3. An expression of Bishop Butler's, which corresponds exactly
to the definition of [Greek: nemesis] in the Rhetoric.

P. 41, l. 9. That is, in the same genus; to be contraries, things must
be generically connected: [Greek: ta pleiston allelon diestekota ton en
to auto genei enantia orizontai]. Categories, iv. 15.

P. 42, l. 22. "[Greek: Deuteros plous] is a proverb," says the Scholiast
on the Phaedo, "used of those who do anything safely and cautiously
inasmuch as they who have miscarried in their first voyage, set about
then: preparations for the second cautiously," and he then alludes to
this passage.

P. 42, l. 31. That is, you must allow for the _recoil_."Naturam expellas
furca tamen usque recurret."

P. 43, l. 2. This illustration sets in so clear a light the doctrines
entertained respectively by Aristotle, Eudoxus, and the Stoics regarding
pleasure, that it is worth while to go into it fully.

The reference is to Iliad iii. 154-160. The old counsellors, as Helen
comes upon the city wall, acknowledge her surpassing beauty, and have no
difficulty in understanding how both nations should have incurred such
suffering for her sake still, fair as she is, home she must go, that she
bring not ruin on themselves and their posterity.

This exactly represents Aristotle's relation to Pleasure he does not,
with Eudoxus and his followers, exalt it into the Summum Bonum (as Paris
would risk all for Helen), nor does he the the Stoics call it wholly
evil, as Hector might have said that the woes Helen had caused
had "banished all the beauty from her cheek," but, with the aged
counsellors, admits its charms, but aware of their dangerousness
resolves to deny himself, he "feels her sweetness, yet defies her
thrall."

P. 43, l. 20. [Greek: Aisthesis] is here used as an analogous noun, to
denote the faculty which, in respect of moral matters, discharges the
same function that bodily sense does in respect of physical objects. It
is worth while to notice how in our colloquial language we carry out the
same analogy. We say of a transaction, that it "looks ugly," "sounds
oddly," is a "nasty job," "stinks in our nostrils," is a "hard dealing."

P. 46, l. 16. A man is not responsible for being [Greek: theratos],
because "particular propensions, from their very nature, must be felt,
the objects of them being present, though they cannot be gratified
at all, or not with the allowance of the moral principle." But he is
responsible for being [Greek: eutheratos], because, though thus formed,
he "might have improved and raised himself to an higher and more secure
state of virtue by the contrary behaviour, by steadily following the
moral principle, supposed to be one part of his nature, and thus
withstanding that unavoidable danger of defection which necessarily
arose from propension, the other part of it. For by thus preserving his
integrity for some time, his danger would lessen, since propensions, by
being inured to submit, would do it more easily and of course and his
security against this lessening danger would increase, since the moral
principle would gain additional strength by exercise, both which things
are implied in the notion of virtuous habits." (From the chapter
on Moral Discipline m the Analogy, sect. iv.) The purpose of this
disquisition is to refute the Necessitarians; it is resumed in the third
chapter of this Book.

P. 47, l. 7. Virtue is not only the duty, but (by the laws of the Moral
Government of the World) also the interest of Man, or to express it in
Bishop Butler's manner, Conscience and Reasonable self-love are the two
principles in our nature which of right have supremacy over the rest,
and these two lead in point of fact the same course of action. (Sermon
II.)

P. 47, l. 7. Any ignorance of particular facts affects the rightness not
of the [Greek: praxis], but of the [Greek: pragma], but ignorance of
_i.e._ incapacity to discern, Principles, shows the Moral Constitution
to have been depraved, _i.e._ shows Conscience to be perverted, or the
sight of Self-love to be impaired.

P. 48, l. 18. [Greek: eneka] primarily denotes the relation of cause and
effect all circumstances which in any way contribute to a cert result
are [Greek: eneka] that result.

From the power which we have or acquire of deducing future results from
present causes we are enabled to act towards, with a view to produce,
these results thus [Greek: eneka] comes to mean not causation merely, but
_designed_ causation and so [Greek: on eneka] is used for Motive, or
final cause.

It is the primary meaning which is here intended, it would be a
contradiction in terms to speak of a man's being ignorant of his own
Motive of action.

When the man "drew a bow at a venture and smote the King of Israel
between the joints of the harnesss" (i Kings xxii 34) he did it [Greek:
eneka ton apdkteinai] the King of Israel, in the primary sense of
[Greek: eneka] that is to say, the King's death was _in fact the
result_, but could not have been the motive, of the shot, because the
King was disguised and the shot was at a venture.

P. 48, l. 22 Bishop Butler would agree to this he says of settled
deliberate anger, "It seems in us plainly connected with a sense of
virtue and vice, of moral good and evil." See the whole Sermon on
Resentment.

P. 48, l 23. Aristotle has, I venture to think, rather quibbled here,
by using [Greek: epithumia] and its verb, equivocally as there is no
following his argument without condescending to the same device, I have
used our word lust in its ancient signification Ps. xxiv. 12, "What man
is he that lusteth to live?"

P. 48, l 28. The meaning is, that the _onus probandi_ is thrown upon
the person who maintains the distinction, Aristotle has a _prima facie_
case. The whole passage is one of difficulty. Card wells text gives the
passage from [Greek: dokei de] as a separate argument Bekker's seems to
intend al 81 ir/jd£eis as a separate argument but if so, the argument
would be a mere _petitio principii_. I have adopted Cardwell's reading
in part, but retain the comma at [Greek: dmpho] and have translated the
last four words as applying to the whole discussion, whereas Cardwell's
reading seems to restrict them to the last argument.

P. 50, l ii. _i.e._ on objects of Moral Choice, opinion of this kind
is not the same as Moral Choice, because actions alone form habits and
constitute character, opinions are in general _signs_ of character, but
when they begin to be acted on they cease to be opinions, and merge in
Moral Choice.

  "Treason doth never prosper, what's the reason?
  When it doth prosper, none dare call it Treason."

P. 53, 1. 4. The introduction of the words [Greek: dia tinos] seems a
mere useless repetition, as in the second chapter [Greek: en tini] added
to [Greek: peri ti]. These I take for some among the many indications
that the treatise is a collection of notes for lectures, and not a
finished or systematic one.

P. 53, 1. 17. Suppose that three alternatives lay before a man, each of
the three is of course an object of Deliberation; when he has made his
choice, the alternative chosen does not cease to be in nature an object
of Deliberation, but superadds the character of being chosen and so
distinguished. Three men are admitted candidates for an office, the one
chosen is the successful candidate, so of the three [Greek: bouleuta],
the one chosen is the [Greek: bouleuton proaireton].

P. 53, 1. 22. Compare Bishop Butler's "System of Human Nature," in the
Preface to the Sermons.

P. 53, 1. 33. These words, [Greek: ek tou bouleusasthai--bouleusin],
contain the account of the whole mental machinery of any action.
The first step is a Wish, implied in the first here mentioned, viz.
Deliberation, for it has been already laid down that Deliberation has
for its object-matter means to Ends supposed to be set before the mind,
the next step is Deliberation, the next Decision, the last the definite
extending of the mental hand towards the object thus selected, the
two last constitute [Greek: proairesis] in its full meaning. The word
[Greek: orexis] means literally "a grasping at or after" now as this
physically may be either vague or definite, so too may the mental act,
consequently the term as transferred to the mind has two uses, and
denotes either the first wish, [Greek: boulaesis], or the last definite
movement, Will in its strict and proper sense. These two uses are
recognised in the Rhetoric (I 10), where [Greek: orexis] is divided into
[Greek: alogos] and [Greek: logistikae].

The illustration then afforded by the polities alluded to is this, as
the Kings first decided and then announced their decision for acceptance
and execution by their subjects, so Reason, having decided on the course
to be taken, communicates its decision to the Will, which then proceeds
to move [Greek: ta organika merae]. To instance in an action of the
mixed kind mentioned in the first chapter, safe arrival at land is
naturally desired, two means are suggested, either a certain loss of
goods, or trying to save both lives and goods, the question being
debated, the former is chosen, this decision is communicated to the
Will, which causes the owner's hands to throw overboard his goods: the
act is denominated voluntary, because the Will is consenting, but in so
denominating it, we leave out of sight how that consent was obtained. In
a purely compulsory case the never gets beyond the stage of Wish, for
no means are power and deliberation therefore is useless, consequently
there is neither Decision nor Will, in other words, no Choice.

P. 54, 1. 18. Compare the statement in the Rhetoric, 1 10, [Greek: esti
d hae men boulaeis agathou orexis (oudeis gar bouletai all ae otan
oiaetho einai agathon)]

P 56, 1. 34. A stone once set in motion cannot be recalled, because
it is then placed under the operation of natural laws which cannot be
controlled or altered, so too in Moral declension, there is a point at
which gravitation operates irretrievably, "there is a certain bound to
imprudence and misbehaviour which being transgressed, there remains no
place for repentance in the natural course of things." Bishop Butler's
Analogy, First Part, chap 11.

P 58, 1. 14. Habits being formed by acting in a certain way under
certain circumstances we can only choose how we will act not what
circumstances we will have to act under.

P. 59, 1. 19. "Moral Courage" is our phrase.

P 61, 1. 6. The meaning of this passage can scarcely be conveyed except
by a paraphrase.

"The object of each separate act of working is that which accords with
the habit they go to form. Courage is the habit which separate acts of
bravery go to form, therefore the object of these is that which accords
with Courage, _i.e._ Courage itself. But Courage is honourable (which
implies that the end and object of it is honour, since things are
denominated according to their end and object), therefore the object of
each separate act of bravery is honour."

P 62, 1. 14. For true Courage is required, i. Exact appreciation of
danger. 2. A Proper motive for resisting fear. Each of the Spurious
kinds will be found to fail in one or other, or both.

P 63, 1. 11. This may merely mean, "who give strict orders" not to
flinch, which would imply the necessity of compulsion The word is
capable of the sense given above, which seems more forcible.

P 63, 1. 19. See Book VI. chap. xiii. near the end [Greek: sokrataes
aehen oun logous tas aretas oeto einai (epiotaemas gar einai pasas)]

P 63, 1. 24. Such as the noise, the rapid movements, and apparent
confusion which to an inexperienced eye and ear would be alarming. So
Livy says of the Gauls, v. 37, Nata in _vanos_ tumultus gens.

P. 64, 1. 5. In Coronea in Boeotia, on the occasion of the citadel being
betrayed to some Phocians. "The regulars" were Boeotian troops, the
[Greek: politika] Coroneans.

P. 64, 1. 9. By the difference of tense it seems Aristotle has mixed
up two things, beginning to speak of the particular instance, and then
carried into the general statement again. This it is scarce worth while
to imitate.

P. 68, 1. 8. The meaning of the phrase [Greek: kata sumbebaekos], as
here used, in given in the Seventh Book, chap. X. [Greek: ei gar tis
todi dia todi aireitai ae diokei, kath ahuto men touto diokei kai
aireitai, kata sumbebaekos de to proteron].

P. 97, 1. 2. Perhaps "things which reflect credit on them" as on page
95.

P. 100, 1. 12. Book VII.

P. 101, 1. 11. Each term is important to make up the character of
Justice, men must have the capacity, do the acts, and do them from moral
choice.

P. 102, 1. 1. But not always. [Greek: Philein], for instance, has two
senses, "to love" and "to kiss," [Greek: misein] but one. Topics, I.
chap. XIII. 5.

P. 102, 1. 6. _Things_ are [Greek: homonuma] which have only their name
in common, being in themselves different. The [Greek: homonumia] is
_close_ therefore when the difference though real is but slight. There
is no English expression for [Greek: homonumia], "equivocal" being
applied to a term and not to its various significates.

P. 102, 1. 24. See Book I. chap. 1. [Greek: toiautaen de tina planaen
echei kai tagatha k.t.l.]

P. 104, 1. 10. A man habitually drunk in private is viewed by our law as
confining his vice to himself, and the law therefore does not attempt
to touch him; a religious hermit may be viewed as one who confines his
virtue to his own person.

P. 105, 1. 5. See the account of Sejanus and Livia. Tac. Annal. IV. 3.

P. 105, 1. 31. Cardwell's text, which here gives [Greek: paranomon],
yields a much easier and more natural sense. All Injustice violates
law, but only the particular kinds violate equality; and therefore the
unlawful : the unequal :: universal Injustice the particular _i.e._ as
whole to part. There is a reading which also alters the words within the
parenthesis, but this hardly affects the gist of the passage.

P. 106, 1. 19. There are two reasons why the characters are not
necessarily coincident. He is a good citizen, who does his best to carry
out the [Greek: politeia] under which he lives, but this may be faulty,
so therefore _pro tanto_ is he.

Again, it is sufficient, so far as the Community is concerned, that
he does the _facts_ of a good man but for the perfection of his own
individual character, he must do them virtuously. A man may move rightly
in his social orbit, without revolving rightly on his own axis.

The question is debated in the Politics, III. 2. Compare also the
distinction between the brave man, and good soldier (supra, Book III.
chap. xii.), and also Bishop Butler's first Sermon.

P. 107, 1. 17. Terms used for persons.

P. 107, 1. 34. By [Greek:----] is meant numbers themselves, 4, 20, 50,
etc, by [Greek:----] these numbers exemplified, 4 horses, 20 sheep, etc.

P 108, 1 14. The profits of a mercantile transaction (say £1000) are to
be divided between A and B, in the ratio of 2 to 3 (which is the real
point to be settled); then,

A  B . 400 600.

A 400 : . B 600 (permutando, and assuming a value for A and B, so as to
make them commensurable with the respectiy sums).

A+400 : B+600 : : A  B. This represents the actual distribution; its
fairness depending entirely on that of the first proportion.

P. 109, 1. 10. _i.e._ Corrective Justice is wrought out by subtraction
from the wrong doer and addition to the party injured.

P. 110, 1. 3. Her Majesty's "Justices."

P. 111, 1. 1. I have omitted the next three lines, as they seem to be
out of place here, and to occur much more naturally afterwards; it not
being likely that they were originally twice written, one is perhaps at
liberty to give Aristotle the benefit of the doubt, and conclude that he
put them where they made the best sense.

P. 111, 1. 8. This I believe to be the meaning of the passage but do not
pretend to be able to get it out of the words.

P 111, 1. 27. This is apparently contrary to what was said before, but
not really so. Aristotle does not mean that the man in authority struck
wrongfully, but he takes the extreme case of simple Reciprocation, and
in the second case, the man who strikes one in authority commits two
offences, one against the person (and so far they are equal), and
another against the office.

P. 112, 1. 5. [Greek:----] denotes, 1st, a kindly feeling issuing in a
gratuitous act of kindness, 2ndly, the effect of this act of kindness
on a generous mind; 3rdly, this effect issuing in a requital of the
kindness.

P. 113, 1. 33. The Shoemaker would get a house while the Builder only
had (say) one pair of shoes, or at all events not so many as he ought to
have. Thus the man producing the least valuable ware would get the most
valuable, and _vice versa_.

Adopting, as I have done, the reading which omits [Greek:----] at
[Greek:----], we have simply a repetition of the caution, that before
Reciprocation is attempted, there must be the same ratio between the
wares as between the persons, _i.e._ the ratio of equality.

If we admit [Greek: ou], the meaning may be, that you must not bring
into the proportion the difference mentioned above [Greek: eteron kai
ouk ison], since for the purposes of commerce all men are equal.

Say that the Builder is to the Shoemaker as 10:1. Then there must be
the same ratio between the wares, consequently the highest artist
will carry off the most valuable wares, thus combining in himself both
[Greek: uperochai]. The following are the three cases, given 100 pr.
shoes = 1 house.

  Builder : Shoemaker : : 1  pr.  shoes      : 1 house--_wrong_.
 -----  -----       100 pr. shoes	   : 1 house--_right_
 -----  -----       10 (100 pr. shoes) : 1 house--_wrong_.

P. 185, l. 30. Every unjust act embodies [Greek: to adikon], which is
a violation of [Greek: to ison], and so implies a greater and a less
share, the former being said to fall to the doer, the latter to the
sufferer, of injury.

P. 116, l. 18. In a pure democracy men are absolutely, _i.e._
numerically, equal, in other forms only proportionately equal. Thus the
meanest British subject is proportionately equal to the Sovereign, that
is to say, is as fully secured in his rights as the Sovereign in hers.

P. 118, l. 8. Or, according to Cardwell's reading ([Greek: kineton ou
mentoi pan]) "but amongst ourselves there is Just, which is naturally
variable, but certainly all Just is not such." The sense of the passage
is not affected by the reading. In Bekker's text we must take [Greek:
kineton] to mean the same as [Greek: kinoumenon], _i.e._ "we admit there
is no Just which has not been sometimes disallowed, still," etc. With
Cardwell's, [Greek: kineton] will mean "which not only _does_ but
naturally _may_ vary."

P. 118, l. 33. Murder is unjust by the law of nature, Smuggling by
enactment. Therefore any act which can be referred to either of these
heads is an unjust act, or, as Bishop Butler phrases it, an act
_materially_ unjust. Thus much may be decided without reference to the
agent. See the note on page 32, l. 16.

P. 121, l. 13. "As distinct from pain or loss." Bishop Butler's Sermon
on Resentment. See also, Rhet. 11. 2 Def. of [Greek: orgae].

P. 121, l. 19. This method of reading the passage is taken from Zell
as quoted in Cardwell's Notes, and seems to yield the best sense. The
Paraphrast gives it as follows:

"But the aggressor is not ignorant that he began, and so he feels
himself to be wrong [and will not acknowledge that he is the aggressor],
but the other does not."

P. 122, l.18. As when a man is "_justified_ at the Grass Market,"
_i.e._ hung. P. 125, 1. 36. Where the stock of good is limited, if any
individual takes more than his share some one else must have less than
his share; where it is infinite, or where there is no good at all this
cannot happen.

P. 128,1 24. The reference is to chap. vii. where it was said that the
law views the parties in a case of particular injustice as originally
equal, but now unequal, the wrong doer the gainer and the sufferer the
loser by the wrong, but in the case above supposed there is but _one_
party.

P, 129, 1. 25. So in the Politics, 1. 2. _Hae men gar psuchae tou
somatos archei despotikaen archaen, o de nous taes orexeos politikaen
kai despotikaev._ Compare also Bishop Butler's account of human nature
as a system--of the different authority of certain principles, and
specially the supremacy of Conscience.

P. 130, 1. 8. I understand the illustration to be taken from the process
of lowering a weight into its place; a block of marble or stone, for
instance, in a building.

P. 131, 1 8. Called for convenience sake Necessary and Contingent
matter.

P. 131, 1. 13. One man learns Mathematics more easily than another, in
common language, _he has a turn for_ Mathematics, _i e_ something in his
mental conformation answers to that science The Phrenologist shows the
bump denoting this aptitude.

P. 131, 1. 21. And therefore the question resolves itself into this,
"What is the work of the Speculative, and what of the Practical, faculty
of Reason." See the description of _apetae_ II. 5.

P. 131, 1. 33. _praxis_ is here used in its strict and proper meaning.

P. 131,1. 34. That is to say, the Will waits upon deliberation in which
Reason is the judge; when the decision is pronounced, the Will must act
accordingly.

The question at issue always is, _Is this Good?_ because the Will is
only moved by an impression of Good; the Decision then will be always
_Aye or No_, and the mental hand is put forth to grasp in the former
case, and retracted in the later.

So far as what must take place in _every_ Moral Action, right or wrong,
the Machinery of the mind being supposed uninjured but to constitute a
good Moral Choice, _i e._. a good Action, the Reason must have said Aye
when it ought.

The cases of faulty action will be, either when the Machinery is perfect
but wrongly directed, as in the case of a deliberate crime, or when the
direction given by the Reason is right but the Will does not move in
accordance with that direction, in other words, when the Machinery is
out of order; as in the case of the [Greek: akrates]--video meliora
proboque, Deteriora sequor.

P. 132, l. 9. See the note on [Greek: Arche] on page 4, l. 30.

P. 133, l. 6. The mind attains truth, either for the sake of truth
itself ([Greek: aplos]), or for the sake of something further ([Greek:
eneka tinos]). If the first then either syllogistically ([Greek:
episteme]), non-syllogistically ([Greek: nous]), or by union of the two
methods ([Greek: sophla]). If the second, either with a view to _act_
([Greek: phronesis]), or with a view to _make_ ([Greek: techne]).

Otherwise. The mind contemplates Matter Necessary or Contingent. If
necessary, Principles ([Greek: nous]), Deductions ([Greek: episteme]),
or Mixed ([Greek: sophla]). If Contingent, Action ([Greek: phronesis]),
Production ([Greek: techen]). (Giphanius quoted in Cardwell's notes.)

P. 133, l. 20. The cobbler is at his last, why? to make shoes, which
are to clothe the feet of someone and the price to be paid, _i.e._
the produce of his industry, is to enable him to support his wife and
children; thus his production is subordinate to Moral Action.

P. 133, l. 23. It may be fairly presumed that Aristotle would not thus
have varied his phrase without some real difference of meaning. That
difference is founded, I think, on the two senses of [Greek: orexis]
before alluded to (note, p. 53, l. 33). The first impulse of the
mind towards Action may be given either by a vague desire or by the
suggestion of Reason. The vague desire passing through the deliberate
stage would issue in Moral Choice. Reason must enlist the Will before
any Action can take place.

Reason ought to be the originator in all cases, as Bishop Butler
observes that Conscience should be. If this were so, every act of Moral
Choice would be [Greek: orektikos nous].

But one obvious function of the feelings and passions in our composite
nature is to instigate Action, when Reason and Conscience by themselves
do not: so that as a matter of fact our Moral Choice is, in general,
fairly described as [Greek: orexis dianoetike]. See Bishop Butler's
Sermon II. and the First upon Compassion.

P. 133, l. 24. It is the opening statement of the Post Analytics.

P. 133, l. 27. Aristotle in his logical analysis of Induction, Prior.
Analytics II. 25, defines it to be "the proving the inherence of the
major term in the middle (_i.e._ proving the truth of the major premiss
in fig. 1) through the minor term." He presupposes a Syllogism in the
first Figure with an universal affirmative conclusion, which reasons, of
course, from an universal, which universal is to be taken as proved by
Induction. His doctrine turns upon a canon which he there quotes. "If
of one and the same term two others be predicated, one of which is
coextensive with that one and the same, the other may be predicated of
that which is thus coextensive." The fact of this coextensiveness must
be ascertained by [Greek: nous], in other words, by the Inductive
Faculty. We will take Aldrich's instance. All Magnets attract iron \ A B
C are Magnets | Presupposed Syllogism reasoning A B C attract iron. /
from an universal.

A B C attract iron (Matter of observation and experiment)

All Magnets are A B C (Assumed by [Greek: nous], i.e. the Inductive
faculty)

All Magnets attract iron (Major premiss of the last Syllogism proved by
taking the minor term of that for the middle term of this.)

Or, according to the canon quoted above: A B C are Magnets. A B C
attract iron.

But [Greek: nous] tells me that the term Magnets is coextensive with the
term A B C, therefore of all Magnets I may predicate that they attract
iron.

Induction is said by Aristotle to be [Greek: hoia phanton], but he says
in the same place that for this reason we must _conceive_ ([Greek:
noehin]) the term containing the particular Instances (as A B C above)
as composed of all the Individuals.

If Induction implied actual examination of all particular instances it
would cease to be Reasoning at all and sink into repeated acts of Simple
Apprehension it is really the bridging over of a chasm, not the steps
cut in the rock on either side to enable us to walk down into and again
out of it. It is a branch of probable Reasoning, and its validity
depends _entirely_ upon the quality of the particular mind which
performs it. Rapid Induction has always been a distinguishing mark of
Genius the certainty produced by it is Subjective and not Objective. It
may be useful to exhibit it Syllogistically, but the Syllogism which
exhibits it is either nugatory, or contains a premiss _literally_ false.
It will be found useful to compare on the subject of Induction _as the
term is used by Aristotle_, Analytica Prior. II 25 26 Analytica Post. I.
1, 3, and I. Topics VI I and X.

P 133 1 32. The reference is made to the Post Analyt I II and it is
impossible to understand the account of [Greek: epistaemae] without a
perusal of the chapter, the additions to the definition referred to
relate to the nature of the premisses from which [Greek: epistaemae]
draws its conclusions they are to be "true, first principles incapable
of any syllogistic proof, better known than the conclusion, prior to it,
and causes of it." (See the appendix to this Book.)

P 134 1 12. This is the test of correct logical division, that the
_membra dividentia_ shall be opposed, _i.e._ not included the one by the
other. P. 134, l. 13. The meaning of the [Greek: hepehi] appears to be
this: the appeal is made in the first instance to popular language, just
as it the case of [Greek: epistaemae], and will be in those of [Greek:
phronaesis] and [Greek: sophia]. We commonly call Architecture an Art,
and it is so and so, therefore the name Art and this so and so are
somehow connected to prove that connection to be "coextensiveness," we
predicate one of the other and then simply convert the proposition,
which is the proper test of any logical definition, or of any specific
property. See the Topics, 1. vi.

P. 135, l. 2. See the parable of the unjust Steward, in which the
popular sense of [Greek: phronaesis] is strongly brought out; [Greek:
ephaenesen ho kurios ton oikonomon taes adikias oti phronimos epoiaesen
hoti ohi viohi tou aionos toutou phronimoteroi, k.t.l.]--Luke xvi. 8.

P. 135, l. 5. Compare the [Greek: aplos] and [Greek: kath' ekasta
pepaideumenos] of Book I. chap. 1.

P. 135, l. 35. The two aspects under which Virtue may be considered as
claiming the allegiance of moral agents are, that of being right,
and that of being truly expedient, because Conscience and Reasonable
Self-Love are the two Principles of our moral constitution naturally
supreme and "Conscience and Self-Love, _if we understand our true
happiness_, always lead us the same way." Bishop Butler, end of Sermon
III.

And again:

"If by _a sense of interest_ is meant a practical regard to what is
upon the whole our Happiness this is not only coincident with the
principle of Virtue or Moral Rectitude, but is a part of the idea
itself. And it is evident this Reasonable Self-Love wants to be
improved as really as any principle in our nature. So little cause is
there for Moralists to disclaim this principle." From the note on
sect. iv. of the chapter on Moral Discipline, Analogy, part I chap. v.

P. 136, l. 6. See the note on [Greek: Arche] on page 4, l. 30.

The student will find it worth while to compare this passage with the
following--Chap. xiii. of this book beginning [Greek: e d' exis to
ommati touto k. t. l]--vii. 4. [Greek: eti kai ode physikos. k.t.l.]
vii. 9.--[Greek: ae gar arethae kai ae mochthaeria. k.t.l.]--iii. 7 _ad
finem_. [Greek: ei de tis legoi. k.t.l.]

P. 136, l. 15. This is not quite fair. Used in its strict sense, Art
does not admit of degrees of excellence any more than Practical Wisdom.
In popular language we use the term "wiser man," as readily as "better
artist" really denoting in each case different degrees of approximation
to Practical Wisdom and Art respectively, [Greek: dia to ginesthai tous
epainous di anaphoras]. I. 12.

P. 136, l. 17. He would be a _better Chymist_ who should poison
intentionally, than he on whose mind the prevailing impression was that
"Epsom Salts mean Oxalic Acid, and Syrup of Senna Laudanum." P. 137,
l. 13. The term Wisdom is used in our English Translation of the Old
Testament in the sense first given to [Greek:----] here. "Then wrought
Bezaleel and Ahohab, and every _wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put
wisdom and understanding_ to know how to work all manner of work for the
service of the Sanctuary" Exodus xxxvi. i.

P. 137 l. 27. [Greek:----] and [Greek:----], (in the strict sense, for it
is used in many different senses in this book) are different parts of
the whole function [Greek:----], [Greek:----] takes in conclusions, drawn
by strict reasoning from Principles of a certain kind which [Greek:
----] supplies. It is conceivable that a man might go on gaining these
principles by Intuition and never reasoning from them, and so [Greek:
----] might exist independent of [Greek:----], but not this without that.
Put the two together, the head to the trunk, and you form the living
being [Greek:----]. There are three branches of [Greek:----] according
to Greek Philosophy, [Greek:----], [Greek:----], [Greek:----]. Science is
perhaps the nearest English term, but we have none really equivalent.

P 137, l. 29. [Greek:----] is here used in its most extensive sense,
[Greek:----] would be its chief Instrument.

P. 138, l. 16. The faculty concerned with which is [Greek:----].

P. 139, l. 16. In every branch of Moral Action in which Practical Wisdom
is employed there will be general principles, and the application of
them, but in some branches there are distinct names appropriated to the
operations of Practical Wisdom, in others there are not.

Thus Practical Wisdom, when employed on the general principles of Civil
Government, is called Legislation, as administering its particular
functions it is called simply Government. In Domestic Management, there
are of course general Rules, and also the particular application of
them; but here the faculty is called only by one name. So too when
Self-Interest is the object of Practical Wisdom.

P. 139, l. 27. [Greek:----], "our mere Operatives in Public business."
(Chalmers.)

P. 139, l. 32. Practical Wisdom may be employed either respecting Self,
(which is [Greek:----] proper) or not-Self, _i.e._ either one's
family=[Greek:----], or one's community=[Greek:----], but here the
supreme and subordinate are distinguished, the former is [Greek:----],
the latter [Greek:----] proper, whose functions are deliberation and
the administration of justice.

P. 140, l. 16. But where can this be done, if there be no community?
see Horace's account of the way in which his father made him reap
instruction from the examples in the society around him. 1. Sat. iv.
105, etc. See also Bishop Butler, Analogy, part I. chap. v. sect. iii.

The whole question of the Selfish Morality is treated in Bishop Butler's
first three and the eleventh Sermons, in which he shows the coincidence
in _fact_ of enlightened Self-Love and Benevolence _i.e._ love of
others. Compare also what is said in the first Book of this treatise,
chap. v., about [Greek: autarkeia].

P. 140, l. 17. More truly "implied," namely, that Practical Wisdom
results from experience.

P. 140, l. 23. This observation seems to be introduced, simply because
suggested by the last, and not because at all relevant to the matter in
hand.

P. 140, l. 27. An instance of Principles gained [Greek: aisthesei].
(Book 1. chap. viii.)

P. 141, l. 1. Particulars are called [Greek: eschata] because they are
last arrived at in the deliberative process, but a little further on we
have the term applied to first principles, because they stand at one
extremity, and facts at the other, of the line of action.

P. 141, l. 12. I prefer the reading [Greek: e phronesis], which gives
this sense, "Well, as I have said, Practical Wisdom is this kind of
sense, and the other we mentioned is different in kind." In a passage so
utterly unimportant, and thrown in almost colloquially, it is not worth
while to take much trouble about such a point.

P. 141, l. 25. The definition of it in the Organon (Post Analyt. 1.
xxiv.), "a happy conjecture of the middle term without time to consider
of it."

The quaestio states the phenomena, and the middle term the causation
the rapid ascertaining of which constitutes [Greek: anchinoia]. All
that receives light from the sun is bright on the side next to the
sun. The moon receives light from the sun, The moon is bright on the
side next the sun. The [Greek: anchinoia] consists in rapidly and
correctly accounting for the observed fact, that the moon is bright on
the side next to the sun.

P. 141, l. 34. Opinion is a complete, deliberation an incomplete, mental
act.

P. 142, l. 19. The End does not sanctify the Means.

P. 142, l. 28. The meaning is, there is one End including all others;
and in this sense [Greek: phronesis] is concerned with means, not Ends
but there are also many subordinate Ends which are in fact Means to the
Great End of all. Good counsel has reference not merely to the grand
End, but to the subordinate Ends which [Greek: phronesis] selects as
being right means to the Grand End of all. P. 142,1. 34. The relative
[Greek: on] might be referred to [Greek: sumpheron], but that [Greek:
eubonlia] has been already divided into two kinds, and this construction
would restrict the name to one of them, namely that [Greek: pros ti
telos] as opposed to that [Greek: pros to telos aplos].

P. 143,1 27. We have no term which at all approximates to the meaning of
this word, much less will our language admit of the play upon it which
connects it with [Greek: suggnomae].

P. 144, 1 i. Meaning, of course, all those which relate to Moral Action.
[Greek: psronaesis ] is equivalent to [Greek: euboulia, ounesis, gnomae,
and nous] (in the new sense here given to it).

The faculty which guides us truly in all matters of Moral Action is
[Greek: phronaesis], i.e. Reason directed by Goodness or Goodness
informed by Reason. But just as every faculty of body and soul is not
actually in operation at the same time, though the Man is acting, so
proper names are given to the various Functions of Practical Wisdom.

Is the [Greek: phronimos] forming plans to attain some particular End?
he is then [Greek: euboulos]--is he passing under review the suggestions
of others? he is [Greek: sunetos]--is he judging of the acts of others?
he admits [Greek: gnomae] to temper the strictness of justness--is he
applying general Rules to particular cases? he is exercising [Greek:
nous praktikos] or [Greek: agsthaesis]--while in each and all he is
[Greek: phronimos]?

P. 144, 1. 7. See note, on p. 140.

P 144 1.19. There are cases where we must simply accept or reject
without proof: either when Principles are propounded which are prior to
all reasoning, or when particular facts are brought before us which are
simply matters of [Greek: agsthaesis]. Aristotle here brings both these
cases within the province of [Greek: nous], _i.e._ he calls by this name
the Faculty which attains Truth in each.

P. 144, 1. 25. _i.e._ of the [Greek: syllogisimai ton prakton].

P 144,1 27. See the note on [Greek: Archae] on p. 4,1 30. As a matter of
fact and mental experience the Major Premiss of the Practica Syllogism
is wrought into the mind by repeatedly acting upon the Minor Premiss
(_i.e._ by [Greek: ethismos]).

  All that is pleasant is to be done,
  This is pleasant,
  This is to be done

By habitually acting on the Minor Premiss, _i.e._ on the suggestions
of [Greek: epithymia], a man comes really to hold the Major Premiss.
Aristotle says of the man destitute of all self-control that he is
firmly persuaded that it is his proper line to pursue the gratification
of his bodily appetites, [Greek: dia to toioytos einai oios diokein
aytas]. And his analysis of [Greek: akrasia] (the state of progress
towards this utter abandonment to passion) shows that each case of
previous good resolution succumbing to temptation is attributable to
[Greek: epithymia] suggesting its own Minor Premiss in place of the
right one. Book VII. 8 and 5. P. 145, l. 4. The _consequentia_ is this:

There are cases both of principles and facts which cannot admit of
reasoning, and must be authoritatively determined by [Greek: nous]. What
makes [Greek: nous] to be a true guide? only practice, i.e. Experience,
and _therefore_, etc.

P. 145, l. 22. This is a note to explain [Greek: hygieina] and [Greek:
euektika], he gives these three uses of the term [Greek: hygieinon] in
the Topics, I. xiii. 10,

  { [Greek: to men hygieias poiætikon], [Greek: hygieinon legetai]
  { [Greek: to de phylaktikon],
  { [Greek: to de sæmantikon].

Of course the same will apply to [Greek: euektikon].

  P. 146, l. 11. Healthiness is the formal cause of health.
  Medicine is the efficient.

See Book X. chap. iv. [Greek: hosper oud hæ hygieia kai ho iatros
homoios aitia esti tou ugiainein].

P. 146, l. 17. [Greek: phronæsis] is here used in a partial sense
to signify the Intellectual, as distinct from the Moral, element of
Practical Wisdom.

P. 146, l. 19. This is another case of an observation being thrown in
_obiter_, not relevant to, but suggested by, the matter in hand.

P. 146, l. 22. See Book II. chap. iii. and V. xiii.

P. 147, l. 6. The article is supplied at [Greek: panourgous], because
the abstract word has just been used expressly in a bad sense. "Up to
anything" is the nearest equivalent to [Greek: panourgos], but too
nearly approaches to a colloquial vulgarism.

P. 147, l. 13. See the note on [Greek: Archæ] on page 4, l. 30.

P. 147, l. 14. And for the Minor, of course,

"This particular action is------."

We may paraphrase [Greek: to telos] by [Greek: ti dei prattein--ti
gar dei prattein hæ mæ, to telos autæs estin] i.e. [Greek: tæs
phronæseos].--(Chap. xi. of this Book.)

P. 147, l. 19. "Look asquint on the face of truth." Sir T. Browne,
Religio Medici.

P. 147, l. 26. The term [Greek: sophronikoi] must be understood as
governing the signification of the other two terms, there being no
single Greek term to denote in either case mere dispositions towards
these Virtues.

P. 147, l. 30. Compare the passage at the commencement of Book X.
[Greek: nun de phainontai] [Greek: katokochimon ek tæs aretæs].

P. 148, l. 10. It must be remembered, that [Greek: phronæsis] is used
throughout this chapter in two senses, its proper and complete sense
of Practical Wisdom, and its incomplete one of merely the Intellectual
Element of it. P. 152, 1. 1. The account of Virtue and Vice hitherto
given represents rather what men _may be_ than what they _are_. In this
book we take a practical view of Virtue and Vice, in their ordinary,
every day development.

P. 152, 1. 17. This illustrates the expression, "_Deceits_ of the
Flesh."

P. 156, 1. 12. Another reading omits the [Greek:----]; the meaning of
the whole passage would be exactly the same--it would then run, "if he
had been convinced of the rightness of what he does, _i.e._ if he were
now acting on conviction, he might stop in his course on a change of
conviction."

P. 158, 1. 4. Major and minor Premises of the [Greek:----]
[Greek----]

P. 158, 1. 8. Some necessarily implying knowledge of the particular,
others not.

P 158, 1. 31. As a modern parallel, take old Trumbull in Scott's "Red
Gauntlet."

P. 159, 1. 23. That is, as I understand it, either the major or the
minor premise, it is true, that "all that is sweet is pleasant," it is
true also, that "this is sweet," what is contrary to Right Reason is the
bringing in this minor to the major _i.e._ the universal maxim,
forbidding to taste. Thus, a man goes to a convivial meeting with the
maxim in his mind "All excess is to be avoided," at a certain time his
[Greek:----] tells him "This glass is excess." As a matter of mere
reasoning, he cannot help receiving the conclusion "This glass is to be
avoided," and supposing him to be morally sound he would accordingly
abstain. But [Greek:----], being a simple tendency towards indulgence
suggests, in place of the minor premise "This is excess," its own
premise "This is sweet," this again suggests the self-indulgent maxim or
principle ('[Greek:----]), "All that is sweet is to be tasted," and so,
by strict logical sequence, proves "This glass is to be tasted."

The solution then of the phænomenon of [Greek:----] is this that
[Greek:----], by its direct action on the animal nature, swamps the
suggestions of Right Reason.

On the high ground of Universals, [Greek:----] i.e. [Greek:----]
easily defeats [Greek:----]. The [Greek:----], an hour before he is in
temptation, would never deliberately prefer the maxim "All that is sweet
is to be tasted" to "All excess is to be avoided." The [Greek:----]
would.

  Horace has a good comment upon this (II Sat 2):

    Quæ virtus et quanta, bom, sit vivere parvo
    Discite, _non inter lances mensasque nitentes_
    Verum hic _impransi_ mecum disquirite

Compare also Proverbs XXIII. 31. "Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red," etc. P. 160, l. 2. [Greek: oron]. Aristotle's own account of this
word (Prior Analyt ii. 1) is [Greek: eis on dialuetai hae protasis],
but both in the account of [Greek: nous] and here it seems that the
proposition itself is really indicated by it.

P. 161, l. 16. The Greek would give "avoids excessive pain," but this is
not true, for the excess of pain would be ground for excuse the warrant
for translating as in the text, is the passage occurring just below
[Greek: diokei tas uperbolas kai pheugei metrias lupas].

P. 162, l. 11. Compare Bishop Butler on Particular Propensions, Analogy,
Part I chap v sect. iv.

P. 162, l. 35. That is, they are to the right states as Vice to Virtue.

P. 165, l. 4 Consult in connection with this Chapter the Chapter on
[Greek: orgae] in the Rhetoric, II. 2, and Bishop Butler's Sermon on
Resentment.

P. 166, l. 7. The reasoning here being somewhat obscure from the
concisement of expression, the following exposition of it is subjoined.

  Actions of Lust are wrong actions done with pleasure,
  Wrong actions done with pleasure are more justly objects of wrath,

[Footnote: [Greek: hubpis] is introduced as the single instance from
which this premiss is proved inductively. See the account of it in the
Chapter of the Rhetoric referred to in the preceding note.]

  Such as are more justly objects of wrath are more unjust,
  Actions of Lust are more unjust

P. 168, l. 3. [Greek: ton dae lechthenton]. Considerable difference of
opinion exists as to the proper meaning of these words. The emendation
which substitutes [Greek: akrataes] for [Greek: akolastos] removes all
difficulty, as the clause would then naturally refer to [Greek: ton mae
proairoumenon] but Zell adheres to the reading in the text of Bekker,
because the authority of MSS and old editions is all on this side.

I understand [Greek: mallon] as meant to modify the word [Greek:
malakias], which properly denotes that phase of [Greek: akrasia] (not
[Greek: akolasia]) which is caused by pain.

The [Greek: akolastos] _deliberately_ pursues pleasure and declines pain
if there is to be a distinct name for the latter phase, it comes under
[Greek: malakia] more nearly than any other term, though perhaps not
quite properly.

Or the words may be understood as referring to the class of wrong acts
caused by avoidance of pain, whether deliberate or otherwise, and then
of course the names of [Greek: malakia] and [Greek: akolasia] may be
fitly given respectively.

P. 169, l. 29. "If we went into a hospital where all were sick or dying,
we should think those least ill who were insensible to pain; a physician
who knew the whole, would behold them with despair. And there is a
mortification of the soul as well as of the body, in which the first
symptoms of returning hope are pain and anguish" Sewell, Sermons to
Young Men (Sermon xii.)

P. 170, 1. 6. Before the time of trial comes the man deliberately makes
his Moral Choice to act rightly, but, at the moment of acting, the
powerful strain of desire makes him contravene this choice his Will does
not act in accordance with the affirmation or negation of his Reason.
His actions are therefore of the mixed kind. See Book III. chap. i, and
note on page 128.

P. 171, 1. 17. Let a man be punctual _on principle_ to any one
engagement in the day, and he must, as a matter of course, keep all his
others in their due places relatively to this one; and so will often
wear an appearance of being needlessly punctilious in trifles.

P. 172, 1. 21. Because he is destitute of these minor springs of action,
which are intended to supply the defects of the higher principle.

See Bishop Butler's first Sermon on Compassion, and the conclusion of
note on p. 129.

P. 179, 1. 4. Abandoning Bekker's punctuation and reading [Greek: mae
agathon], yields a better sense.

"Why will he want it on the supposition that it is not good? He can live
even with Pain because," etc.

P. 179, 1. 25. [Greek: pheugei] may be taken perhaps as equivalent
to [Greek: pheugouoi] and so balance [Greek: chairouoi]. But compare
Chapter VIII (Bekker).

P. 183, 1. 6. "Owe no man anything, but to _love_ one another for he
that loveth another _hath fulfilled the Law_." Romans XIII. 8.

P. 183, I. 20. [Greek: kerameis]. The Proverb in full is a line from
Hesiod, [Greek: kahi keramehus keramei koteei kai tektoni tekton].

P. 184, I. 33. In this sense, therefore, is it sung of Mrs. Gilpin that
she

  "two stone bottles found,
  To hold the liquor that she _loved_,
  And keep it safe and sound."

P. 187, 1. 24. Cardwell's reading, [Greek: tautae gar omoioi, kai ta
loipa] is here adopted, as yielding a better sense than Bekker's.

P. 192, 1. 34. The Great man will have a right to look for more
Friendship than he bestows, but the Good man _can_ feel Friendship only
for, and in proportion to, the goodness of the other.

P. 195, 1. 12. See note on page 68, 1. 8.

P. 202, 1. 28. See I. Topics, Chap. v. on the various senses of [Greek:
tauton].

P. 203, 1. 35. "For the mutual society, help, and comfort that the one
ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity." P. 206,
1. 10. Which one would be assuming he was, if one declined to recognise
the obligation to requite the favour or kindness.

P. 217, 1. 10. "Neither the Son of man, that He should _repent_."
Numbers xxiii. 19.

"In a few instances the Second Intention, or Philosophical employment
of a Term, is more extensive than the First Intention, or popular use."
Whately, Logic, iii. 10.

P. 218, 1. 17. "I have sometimes considered in what troublesome case is
that Chamberlain in an Inn who being but one is to give attendance to
many guests. For suppose them all in one chamber, yet, if one shall
command him to come to the window, and the other to the table, and
another to the bed, and another to the chimney, and another to come
upstairs, and another to go downstairs, and all in the same instant,
how would he be distracted to please them all? And yet such is the sad
condition of nay soul by nature, not only a servant but a slave unto
sin. Pride calls me to the window, gluttony to the table, wantonness to
the bed, laziness to the chimney, ambition commands me to go upstairs,
and covetousness to come down. Vices, I see, are as well contrary to
themselves as to Virtue." (Fuller's Good Thoughts in Bad Times. Mix't
Contemplations, viii.)

P. 235, 1. 14. See note, p. 43.

P. 235, 1. 24. See Book II. chap. ix.

P. 237, 1. 3. See Book I. chap. v. ad finem.

P. 238, 1. 2. The notion alluded to is that of the [greek: idea]: that
there is no real substantial good except the [greek: auto agathon],
and therefore whatever is so called is so named in right of its
participation in that.

P. 238, 1. 9. See note on page 136, 1. 15.

P. 238, 1. 24. Movement is, according to Aristotle, of six kinds: [sidenote:Categories, chap xi.]From not being to being    .  .  .  .	 Generation
   From being to not being    .  .  .  .    Destruction
   From being to being more   .  .  .  .    Increase
   From being to being less   .  .  .  .    Diminution
   From being here to being there   .  .    Change of Place
   From being in this way to being in that  Alteration

P. 238, 1 31. _A_ may go to sleep quicker than _B_, but cannot _do more
sleep_ in a given time.

P. 239, 1. 3. Compare Book III. chap. vi. [Greek: osper kai epi ton
somaton, k. t. l.]

P. 241, 1. 6. Which is of course a [Greek: genesis].

P. 241, 1. 9. That is, subordinate Movements are complete before
the whole Movement is. P. 242, 1. 7. Pleasure is so instantaneous a
sensation, that it cannot be conceived divisible or incomplete; the
longest continued Pleasure is only a succession of single sparks, so
rapid as to give the appearance of a stream, of light.

P. 245, 1. 18. A man is as effectually hindered from taking a walk by
the [Greek: allotria haedouae] of reading a novel, as by the [Greek:
oikeia lupae] of gout in the feet.

P. 249, 1. 12. I have thus rendered [Greek: spoudae (ouk agnoon to
hamartanomenon)]; but, though the English term does not represent the
depth of the Greek one, it is some approximation to the truth to connect
an earnest serious purpose with Happiness.

P. 250, 1. 12. Bishop Butler, _contra_ (Sermon XV.).

"Knowledge is not our proper Happiness. Whoever will in the least attend
to the thing will see that it is the gaining, not the having, of it,
which is the entertainment of the mind." The two statements may however
be reconciled. Aristotle may be well understood only to mean, that the
pursuit of knowledge will be the pleasanter, the freer it is from the
minor hindrances which attend on _learning_.

Footnote P. 250, 1. 30. The clause immediately following indicates that
Aristotle felt this statement to be at first sight startling, Happiness
having been all the way through connected with [Greek: energeia], but
the statement illustrates and confirms what was said in note on page 6,
1. 15.

P. 251, 1. 7. That is to say, he aims at producing not merely a happy
aggregate, but an aggregate of happy individuals. Compare what is said
of Legislators in the last chapter of Book I and the first of Book II.﻿I propose to treat of Poetry in itself and of its various kinds, noting
the essential quality of each; to inquire into the structure of the plot
as requisite to a good poem; into the number and nature of the parts of
which a poem is composed; and similarly into whatever else falls within
the same inquiry. Following, then, the order of nature, let us begin
with the principles which come first.

Epic poetry and Tragedy, Comedy also and Dithyrambic: poetry, and the
music of the flute and of the lyre in most of their forms, are all in
their general conception modes of imitation. They differ, however, from
one: another in three respects,--the medium, the objects, the manner or
mode of imitation, being in each case distinct.

For as there are persons who, by conscious art or mere habit, imitate
and represent various objects through the medium of colour and form, or
again by the voice; so in the arts above mentioned, taken as a whole,
the imitation is produced by rhythm, language, or 'harmony,' either
singly or combined.

Thus in the music of the flute and of the lyre, 'harmony' and rhythm
alone are employed; also in other arts, such as that of the shepherd's
pipe, which are essentially similar to these. In dancing, rhythm alone
is used without 'harmony'; for even dancing imitates character, emotion,
and action, by rhythmical movement.

There is another art which imitates by means of language alone, and
that either in prose or verse--which, verse, again, may either combine
different metres or consist of but one kind--but this has hitherto been
without a name. For there is no common term we could apply to the mimes
of Sophron and Xenarchus and the Socratic dialogues on the one hand;
and, on the other, to poetic imitations in iambic, elegiac, or any
similar metre. People do, indeed, add the word 'maker' or 'poet' to
the name of the metre, and speak of elegiac poets, or epic (that is,
hexameter) poets, as if it were not the imitation that makes the poet,
but the verse that entitles them all indiscriminately to the name. Even
when a treatise on medicine or natural science is brought out in verse,
the name of poet is by custom given to the author; and yet Homer and
Empedocles have nothing in common but the metre, so that it would be
right to call the one poet, the other physicist rather than poet. On the
same principle, even if a writer in his poetic imitation were to combine
all metres, as Chaeremon did in his Centaur, which is a medley composed
of metres of all kinds, we should bring him too under the general term
poet. So much then for these distinctions.

There are, again, some arts which employ all the means above mentioned,
namely, rhythm, tune, and metre. Such are Dithyrambic and Nomic poetry,
and also Tragedy and Comedy; but between them the difference is, that in
the first two cases these means are all employed in combination, in the
latter, now one means is employed, now another.

Such, then, are the differences of the arts with respect to the medium
of imitation.




II

Since the objects of imitation are men in action, and these men must be
either of a higher or a lower type (for moral character mainly answers
to these divisions, goodness and badness being the distinguishing marks
of moral differences), it follows that we must represent men either as
better than in real life, or as worse, or as they are. It is the same
in painting. Polygnotus depicted men as nobler than they are, Pauson as
less noble, Dionysius drew them true to life.

Now it is evident that each of the modes of imitation above mentioned
will exhibit these differences, and become a distinct kind in imitating
objects that are thus distinct. Such diversities may be found even in
dancing, flute-playing, and lyre-playing. So again in language, whether
prose or verse unaccompanied by music. Homer, for example, makes men
better than they are; Cleophon as they are; Hegemon the Thasian, the
inventor of parodies, and Nicochares, the author of the Deiliad, worse
than they are. The same thing holds good of Dithyrambs and Nomes;
here too one may portray different types, as Timotheus and Philoxenus
differed in representing their Cyclopes. The same distinction marks
off Tragedy from Comedy; for Comedy aims at representing men as worse,
Tragedy as better than in actual life.




III

There is still a third difference--the manner in which each of these
objects may be imitated. For the medium being the same, and the objects
the same, the poet may imitate by narration--in which case he can either
take another personality as Homer does, or speak in his own person,
unchanged--or he may present all his characters as living and moving
before us.

These, then, as we said at the beginning, are the three differences
which distinguish artistic imitation,--the medium, the objects, and the
manner. So that from one point of view, Sophocles is an imitator of the
same kind as Homer--for both imitate higher types of character; from
another point of view, of the same kind as Aristophanes--for both
imitate persons acting and doing. Hence, some say, the name of 'drama'
is given to such poems, as representing action. For the same reason the
Dorians claim the invention both of Tragedy and Comedy. The claim to
Comedy is put forward by the Megarians,--not only by those of Greece
proper, who allege that it originated under their democracy, but also
by the Megarians of Sicily, for the poet Epicharmus, who is much earlier
than Chionides and Magnes, belonged to that country. Tragedy too is
claimed by certain Dorians of the Peloponnese. In each case they appeal
to the evidence of language. The outlying villages, they say, are by
them called {kappa omega mu alpha iota}, by the Athenians {delta eta
mu iota}: and they assume that Comedians were so named not from {kappa
omega mu 'alpha zeta epsilon iota nu}, 'to revel,' but because they
wandered from village to village (kappa alpha tau alpha / kappa omega mu
alpha sigma), being excluded contemptuously from the city. They add
also that the Dorian word for 'doing' is {delta rho alpha nu}, and the
Athenian, {pi rho alpha tau tau epsilon iota nu}.

This may suffice as to the number and nature of the various modes of
imitation.




IV

Poetry in general seems to have sprung from two causes, each of them
lying deep in our nature. First, the instinct of imitation is implanted
in man from childhood, one difference between him and other animals
being that he is the most imitative of living creatures, and through
imitation learns his earliest lessons; and no less universal is the
pleasure felt in things imitated. We have evidence of this in the facts
of experience. Objects which in themselves we view with pain, we delight
to contemplate when reproduced with minute fidelity: such as the forms
of the most ignoble animals and of dead bodies. The cause of this again
is, that to learn gives the liveliest pleasure, not only to philosophers
but to men in general; whose capacity, however, of learning is more
limited. Thus the reason why men enjoy seeing a likeness is, that in
contemplating it they find themselves learning or inferring, and saying
perhaps, 'Ah, that is he.' For if you happen not to have seen the
original, the pleasure will be due not to the imitation as such, but to
the execution, the colouring, or some such other cause.

Imitation, then, is one instinct of our nature. Next, there is the
instinct for 'harmony' and rhythm, metres being manifestly sections of
rhythm. Persons, therefore, starting with this natural gift developed
by degrees their special aptitudes, till their rude improvisations gave
birth to Poetry.

Poetry now diverged in two directions, according to the individual
character of the writers. The graver spirits imitated noble actions, and
the actions of good men. The more trivial sort imitated the actions of
meaner persons, at first composing satires, as the former did hymns to
the gods and the praises of famous men. A poem of the satirical kind
cannot indeed be put down to any author earlier than Homer; though many
such writers probably there were. But from Homer onward, instances
can be cited,--his own Margites, for example, and other similar
compositions. The appropriate metre was also here introduced; hence the
measure is still called the iambic or lampooning measure, being that
in which people lampooned one another. Thus the older poets were
distinguished as writers of heroic or of lampooning verse.

As, in the serious style, Homer is pre-eminent among poets, for he alone
combined dramatic form with excellence of imitation, so he too first
laid down the main lines of Comedy, by dramatising the ludicrous instead
of writing personal satire. His Margites bears the same relation to
Comedy that the Iliad and Odyssey do to Tragedy. But when Tragedy and
Comedy came to light, the two classes of poets still followed their
natural bent: the lampooners became writers of Comedy, and the Epic
poets were succeeded by Tragedians, since the drama was a larger and
higher form of art.

Whether Tragedy has as yet perfected its proper types or not; and
whether it is to be judged in itself, or in relation also to the
audience,--this raises another question. Be that as it may, Tragedy--as
also Comedy--was at first mere improvisation. The one originated with
the authors of the Dithyramb, the other with those of the phallic songs,
which are still in use in many of our cities. Tragedy advanced by slow
degrees; each new element that showed itself was in turn developed.
Having passed through many changes, it found its natural form, and there
it stopped.

Aeschylus first introduced a second actor; he diminished the importance
of the Chorus, and assigned the leading part to the dialogue. Sophocles
raised the number of actors to three, and added scene-painting.
Moreover, it was not till late that the short plot was discarded for
one of greater compass, and the grotesque diction of the earlier satyric
form for the stately manner of Tragedy. The iambic measure then replaced
the trochaic tetrameter, which was originally employed when the poetry
was of the Satyric order, and had greater affinities with dancing. Once
dialogue had come in, Nature herself discovered the appropriate measure.
For the iambic is, of all measures, the most colloquial: we see it
in the fact that conversational speech runs into iambic lines more
frequently than into any other kind of verse; rarely into hexameters,
and only when we drop the colloquial intonation. The additions to
the number of 'episodes' or acts, and the other accessories of which
tradition; tells, must be taken as already described; for to discuss
them in detail would, doubtless, be a large undertaking.




V

Comedy is, as we have said, an imitation of characters of a lower type,
not, however, in the full sense of the word bad, the Ludicrous being
merely a subdivision of the ugly. It consists in some defect or ugliness
which is not painful or destructive. To take an obvious example, the
comic mask is ugly and distorted, but does not imply pain.

The successive changes through which Tragedy passed, and the authors
of these changes, are well known, whereas Comedy has had no history,
because it was not at first treated seriously. It was late before the
Archon granted a comic chorus to a poet; the performers were till then
voluntary. Comedy had already taken definite shape when comic poets,
distinctively so called, are heard of. Who furnished it with masks, or
prologues, or increased the number of actors,--these and other similar
details remain unknown. As for the plot, it came originally from
Sicily; but of Athenian writers Crates was the first who, abandoning the
'iambic' or lampooning form, generalised his themes and plots.

Epic poetry agrees with Tragedy in so far as it is an imitation in verse
of characters of a higher type. They differ, in that Epic poetry admits
but one kind of metre, and is narrative in form. They differ, again,
in their length: for Tragedy endeavours, as far as possible, to confine
itself to a single revolution of the sun, or but slightly to exceed this
limit; whereas the Epic action has no limits of time. This, then, is
a second point of difference; though at first the same freedom was
admitted in Tragedy as in Epic poetry.

Of their constituent parts some are common to both, some peculiar to
Tragedy, whoever, therefore, knows what is good or bad Tragedy, knows
also about Epic poetry. All the elements of an Epic poem are found in
Tragedy, but the elements of a Tragedy are not all found in the Epic
poem.




VI

Of the poetry which imitates in hexameter verse, and of Comedy, we
will speak hereafter. Let us now discuss Tragedy, resuming its formal
definition, as resulting from what has been already said.

Tragedy, then, is an imitation of an action that is serious, complete,
and of a certain magnitude; in language embellished with each kind of
artistic ornament, the several kinds being found in separate parts of
the play; in the form of action, not of narrative; through pity and
fear effecting the proper purgation of these emotions. By 'language
embellished,' I mean language into which rhythm, 'harmony,' and song
enter. By 'the several kinds in separate parts,' I mean, that some parts
are rendered through the medium of verse alone, others again with the
aid of song.

Now as tragic imitation implies persons acting, it necessarily follows,
in the first place, that Spectacular equipment will be a part of
Tragedy. Next, Song and Diction, for these are the medium of imitation.
By 'Diction' I mean the mere metrical arrangement of the words: as for
'Song,' it is a term whose sense every one understands.

Again, Tragedy is the imitation of an action; and an action implies
personal agents, who necessarily possess certain distinctive qualities
both of character and thought; for it is by these that we qualify
actions themselves, and these--thought and character--are the two
natural causes from which actions spring, and on actions again all
success or failure depends. Hence, the Plot is the imitation of the
action: for by plot I here mean the arrangement of the incidents. By
Character I mean that in virtue of which we ascribe certain qualities to
the agents. Thought is required wherever a statement is proved, or, it
may be, a general truth enunciated. Every Tragedy, therefore, must have
six parts, which parts determine its quality--namely, Plot, Character,
Diction, Thought, Spectacle, Song. Two of the parts constitute the
medium of imitation, one the manner, and three the objects of imitation.
And these complete the list. These elements have been employed, we may
say, by the poets to a man; in fact, every play contains Spectacular
elements as well as Character, Plot, Diction, Song, and Thought.

But most important of all is the structure of the incidents. For Tragedy
is an imitation, not of men, but of an action and of life, and life
consists in action, and its end is a mode of action, not a quality. Now
character determines men's qualities, but it is by their actions that
they are happy or the reverse. Dramatic action, therefore, is not with
a view to the representation of character: character comes in as
subsidiary to the actions. Hence the incidents and the plot are the
end of a tragedy; and the end is the chief thing of all. Again, without
action there cannot be a tragedy; there may be without character.
The tragedies of most of our modern poets fail in the rendering of
character; and of poets in general this is often true. It is the same
in painting; and here lies the difference between Zeuxis and Polygnotus.
Polygnotus delineates character well: the style of Zeuxis is devoid
of ethical quality. Again, if you string together a set of speeches
expressive of character, and well finished in point of diction and
thought, you will not produce the essential tragic effect nearly so well
as with a play which, however deficient in these respects, yet has a
plot and artistically constructed incidents. Besides which, the most
powerful elements of emotional: interest in Tragedy Peripeteia or
Reversal of the Situation, and Recognition scenes--are parts of the
plot. A further proof is, that novices in the art attain to finish: of
diction and precision of portraiture before they can construct the plot.
It is the same with almost all the early poets.

The Plot, then, is the first principle, and, as it were, the soul of
a tragedy: Character holds the second place. A similar fact is seen in
painting. The most beautiful colours, laid on confusedly, will not give
as much pleasure as the chalk outline of a portrait. Thus Tragedy is
the imitation of an action, and of the agents mainly with a view to the
action.

Third in order is Thought,--that is, the faculty of saying what is
possible and pertinent in given circumstances. In the case of oratory,
this is the function of the Political art and of the art of rhetoric:
and so indeed the older poets make their characters speak the language
of civic life; the poets of our time, the language of the rhetoricians.
Character is that which reveals moral purpose, showing what kind of
things a man chooses or avoids. Speeches, therefore, which do not make
this manifest, or in which the speaker does not choose or avoid anything
whatever, are not expressive of character. Thought, on the other hand,
is found where something is proved to be, or not to be, or a general
maxim is enunciated.

Fourth among the elements enumerated comes Diction; by which I mean, as
has been already said, the expression of the meaning in words; and its
essence is the same both in verse and prose.

Of the remaining elements Song holds the chief place among the
embellishments.

The Spectacle has, indeed, an emotional attraction of its own, but, of
all the parts, it is the least artistic, and connected least with the
art of poetry. For the power of Tragedy, we may be sure, is felt
even apart from representation and actors. Besides, the production of
spectacular effects depends more on the art of the stage machinist than
on that of the poet.




VII

These principles being established, let us now discuss the proper
structure of the Plot, since this is the first and most important thing
in Tragedy.

Now, according to our definition, Tragedy is an imitation of an action
that is complete, and whole, and of a certain magnitude; for there may
be a whole that is wanting in magnitude. A whole is that which has a
beginning, a middle, and an end. A beginning is that which does not
itself follow anything by causal necessity, but after which something
naturally is or comes to be. An end, on the contrary, is that which
itself naturally follows some other thing, either by necessity, or as
a rule, but has nothing following it. A middle is that which follows
something as some other thing follows it. A well constructed plot,
therefore, must neither begin nor end at haphazard, but conform to these
principles.

Again, a beautiful object, whether it be a living organism or any whole
composed of parts, must not only have an orderly arrangement of parts,
but must also be of a certain magnitude; for beauty depends on magnitude
and order. Hence a very small animal organism cannot be beautiful;
for the view of it is confused, the object being seen in an almost
imperceptible moment of time. Nor, again, can one of vast size be
beautiful; for as the eye cannot take it all in at once, the unity and
sense of the whole is lost for the spectator; as for instance if there
were one a thousand miles long. As, therefore, in the case of animate
bodies and organisms a certain magnitude is necessary, and a magnitude
which may be easily embraced in one view; so in the plot, a certain
length is necessary, and a length which can be easily embraced by the
memory. The limit of length in relation to dramatic competition and
sensuous presentment, is no part of artistic theory. For had it been the
rule for a hundred tragedies to compete together, the performance would
have been regulated by the water-clock,--as indeed we are told was
formerly done. But the limit as fixed by the nature of the drama itself
is this: the greater the length, the more beautiful will the piece be
by reason of its size, provided that the whole be perspicuous. And
to define the matter roughly, we may say that the proper magnitude is
comprised within such limits, that the sequence of events, according
to the law of probability or necessity, will admit of a change from bad
fortune to good, or from good fortune to bad.




VIII

Unity of plot does not, as some persons think, consist in the Unity of
the hero. For infinitely various are the incidents in one man's life
which cannot be reduced to unity; and so, too, there are many actions of
one man out of which we cannot make one action. Hence, the error, as it
appears, of all poets who have composed a Heracleid, a Theseid, or other
poems of the kind. They imagine that as Heracles was one man, the story
of Heracles must also be a unity. But Homer, as in all else he is of
surpassing merit, here too--whether from art or natural genius--seems
to have happily discerned the truth. In composing the Odyssey he did not
include all the adventures of Odysseus--such as his wound on Parnassus,
or his feigned madness at the mustering of the host--incidents between
which there was no necessary or probable connection: but he made the
Odyssey, and likewise the Iliad, to centre round an action that in our
sense of the word is one. As therefore, in the other imitative arts, the
imitation is one when the object imitated is one, so the plot, being an
imitation of an action, must imitate one action and that a whole, the
structural union of the parts being such that, if any one of them is
displaced or removed, the whole will be disjointed and disturbed. For a
thing whose presence or absence makes no visible difference, is not an
organic part of the whole.




IX

It is, moreover, evident from what has been said, that it is not
the function of the poet to relate what has happened, but what may
happen,--what is possible according to the law of probability or
necessity. The poet and the historian differ not by writing in verse or
in prose. The work of Herodotus might be put into verse, and it would
still be a species of history, with metre no less than without it. The
true difference is that one relates what has happened, the other what
may happen. Poetry, therefore, is a more philosophical and a higher
thing than history: for poetry tends to express the universal, history
the particular. By the universal, I mean how a person of a certain type
will on occasion speak or act, according to the law of probability or
necessity; and it is this universality at which poetry aims in the names
she attaches to the personages. The particular is--for example--what
Alcibiades did or suffered. In Comedy this is already apparent: for here
the poet first constructs the plot on the lines of probability, and then
inserts characteristic names;--unlike the lampooners who write about
particular individuals. But tragedians still keep to real names, the
reason being that what is possible is credible: what has not happened
we do not at once feel sure to be possible: but what has happened is
manifestly possible: otherwise it would not have happened. Still there
are even some tragedies in which there are only one or two well known
names, the rest being fictitious. In others, none are well known, as in
Agathon's Antheus, where incidents and names alike are fictitious, and
yet they give none the less pleasure. We must not, therefore, at all
costs keep to the received legends, which are the usual subjects of
Tragedy. Indeed, it would be absurd to attempt it; for even subjects
that are known are known only to a few, and yet give pleasure to all.
It clearly follows that the poet or 'maker' should be the maker of plots
rather than of verses; since he is a poet because he imitates, and what
he imitates are actions. And even if he chances to take an historical
subject, he is none the less a poet; for there is no reason why some
events that have actually happened should not conform to the law of the
probable and possible, and in virtue of that quality in them he is their
poet or maker.

Of all plots and actions the epeisodic are the worst. I call a plot
'epeisodic' in which the episodes or acts succeed one another without
probable or necessary sequence. Bad poets compose such pieces by their
own fault, good poets, to please the players; for, as they write show
pieces for competition, they stretch the plot beyond its capacity, and
are often forced to break the natural continuity.

But again, Tragedy is an imitation not only of a complete action, but of
events inspiring fear or pity. Such an effect is best produced when the
events come on us by surprise; and the effect is heightened when, at the
same time, they follow as cause and effect. The tragic wonder will thee
be greater than if they happened of themselves or by accident; for even
coincidences are most striking when they have an air of design. We may
instance the statue of Mitys at Argos, which fell upon his murderer
while he was a spectator at a festival, and killed him. Such events seem
not to be due to mere chance. Plots, therefore, constructed on these
principles are necessarily the best.




X

Plots are either Simple or Complex, for the actions in real life, of
which the plots are an imitation, obviously show a similar distinction.
An action which is one and continuous in the sense above defined, I call
Simple, when the change of fortune takes place without Reversal of the
Situation and without Recognition.

A Complex action is one in which the change is accompanied by such
Reversal, or by Recognition, or by both. These last should arise from
the internal structure of the plot, so that what follows should be the
necessary or probable result of the preceding action. It makes all the
difference whether any given event is a case of propter hoc or post hoc.




XI

Reversal of the Situation is a change by which the action veers round
to its opposite, subject always to our rule of probability or necessity.
Thus in the Oedipus, the messenger comes to cheer Oedipus and free
him from his alarms about his mother, but by revealing who he is, he
produces the opposite effect. Again in the Lynceus, Lynceus is being led
away to his death, and Danaus goes with him, meaning, to slay him; but
the outcome of the preceding incidents is that Danaus is killed and
Lynceus saved. Recognition, as the name indicates, is a change from
ignorance to knowledge, producing love or hate between the persons
destined by the poet for good or bad fortune. The best form of
recognition is coincident with a Reversal of the Situation, as in the
Oedipus. There are indeed other forms. Even inanimate things of the most
trivial kind may in a sense be objects of recognition. Again, we may
recognise or discover whether a person has done a thing or not. But the
recognition which is most intimately connected with the plot and action
is, as we have said, the recognition of persons. This recognition,
combined, with Reversal, will produce either pity or fear; and actions
producing these effects are those which, by our definition, Tragedy
represents. Moreover, it is upon such situations that the issues of good
or bad fortune will depend. Recognition, then, being between persons,
it may happen that one person only is recognised by the other-when the
latter is already known--or it may be necessary that the recognition
should be on both sides. Thus Iphigenia is revealed to Orestes by the
sending of the letter; but another act of recognition is required to
make Orestes known to Iphigenia.

Two parts, then, of the Plot--Reversal of the Situation and
Recognition--turn upon surprises. A third part is the Scene of
Suffering. The Scene of Suffering is a destructive or painful action,
such as death on the stage, bodily agony, wounds and the like.




XII

[The parts of Tragedy which must be treated as elements of the whole
have been already mentioned. We now come to the quantitative parts,
and the separate parts into which Tragedy is divided, namely, Prologue,
Episode, Exode, Choric song; this last being divided into Parode and
Stasimon. These are common to all plays: peculiar to some are the songs
of actors from the stage and the Commoi.

The Prologue is that entire part of a tragedy which precedes the Parode
of the Chorus. The Episode is that entire part of a tragedy which
is between complete choric songs. The Exode is that entire part of a
tragedy which has no choric song after it. Of the Choric part the Parode
is the first undivided utterance of the Chorus: the Stasimon is a Choric
ode without anapaests or trochaic tetrameters: the Commos is a joint
lamentation of Chorus and actors. The parts of Tragedy which must
be treated as elements of the whole have been already mentioned. The
quantitative parts the separate parts into which it is divided--are here
enumerated.]




XIII

As the sequel to what has already been said, we must proceed to consider
what the poet should aim at, and what he should avoid, in constructing
his plots; and by what means the specific effect of Tragedy will be
produced.

A perfect tragedy should, as we have seen, be arranged not on the simple
but on the complex plan. It should, moreover, imitate actions which
excite pity and fear, this being the distinctive mark of tragic
imitation. It follows plainly, in the first place, that the change, of
fortune presented must not be the spectacle of a virtuous man brought
from prosperity to adversity: for this moves neither pity nor fear; it
merely shocks us. Nor, again, that of a bad man passing from adversity
to prosperity: for nothing can be more alien to the spirit of Tragedy;
it possesses no single tragic quality; it neither satisfies the moral
sense nor calls forth pity or fear. Nor, again, should the downfall of
the utter villain be exhibited. A plot of this kind would, doubtless,
satisfy the moral sense, but it would inspire neither pity nor fear; for
pity is aroused by unmerited misfortune, fear by the misfortune of a man
like ourselves. Such an event, therefore, will be neither pitiful
nor terrible. There remains, then, the character between these two
extremes,--that of a man who is not eminently good and just,-yet whose
misfortune is brought about not by vice or depravity, but by some error
or frailty. He must be one who is highly renowned and prosperous,--a
personage like Oedipus, Thyestes, or other illustrious men of such
families.

A well constructed plot should, therefore, be single in its issue,
rather than double as some maintain. The change of fortune should be not
from bad to good, but, reversely, from good to bad. It should come about
as the result not of vice, but of some great error or frailty, in a
character either such as we have described, or better rather than
worse. The practice of the stage bears out our view. At first the poets
recounted any legend that came in their way. Now, the best tragedies
are founded on the story of a few houses, on the fortunes of Alcmaeon,
Oedipus, Orestes, Meleager, Thyestes, Telephus, and those others who
have done or suffered something terrible. A tragedy, then, to be perfect
according to the rules of art should be of this construction. Hence
they are in error who censure Euripides just because he follows this
principle in his plays, many of which end unhappily. It is, as we have
said, the right ending. The best proof is that on the stage and in
dramatic competition, such plays, if well worked out, are the most
tragic in effect; and Euripides, faulty though he may be in the general
management of his subject, yet is felt to be the most tragic of the
poets.

In the second rank comes the kind of tragedy which some place first.
Like the Odyssey, it has a double thread of plot, and also an opposite
catastrophe for the good and for the bad. It is accounted the best
because of the weakness of the spectators; for the poet is guided in
what he writes by the wishes of his audience. The pleasure, however,
thence derived is not the true tragic pleasure. It is proper rather to
Comedy, where those who, in the piece, are the deadliest enemies--like
Orestes and Aegisthus--quit the stage as friends at the close, and no
one slays or is slain.




XIV

Fear and pity may be aroused by spectacular means; but they may also
result from the inner structure of the piece, which is the better way,
and indicates a superior poet. For the plot ought to be so constructed
that, even without the aid of the eye, he who hears the tale told will
thrill with horror and melt to pity at what takes place. This is the
impression we should receive from hearing the story of the Oedipus. But
to produce this effect by the mere spectacle is a less artistic method,
and dependent on extraneous aids. Those who employ spectacular means
to create a sense not of the terrible but only of the monstrous, are
strangers to the purpose of Tragedy; for we must not demand of Tragedy
any and every kind of pleasure, but only that which is proper to it. And
since the pleasure which the poet should afford is that which comes from
pity and fear through imitation, it is evident that this quality must be
impressed upon the incidents.

Let us then determine what are the circumstances which strike us as
terrible or pitiful.

Actions capable of this effect must happen between persons who are
either friends or enemies or indifferent to one another. If an enemy
kills an enemy, there is nothing to excite pity either in the act or
the intention,--except so far as the suffering in itself is pitiful.
So again with indifferent persons. But when the tragic incident occurs
between those who are near or dear to one another--if, for example, a
brother kills, or intends to kill, a brother, a son his father, a mother
her son, a son his mother, or any other deed of the kind is done--these
are the situations to be looked for by the poet. He may not indeed
destroy the framework of the received legends--the fact, for instance,
that Clytemnestra was slain by Orestes and Eriphyle by Alcmaeon but he
ought to show invention of his own, and skilfully handle the traditional
material. Let us explain more clearly what is meant by skilful handling.

The action may be done consciously and with knowledge of the persons, in
the manner of the older poets. It is thus too that Euripides makes Medea
slay her children. Or, again, the deed of horror may be done, but
done in ignorance, and the tie of kinship or friendship be discovered
afterwards. The Oedipus of Sophocles is an example. Here, indeed, the
incident is outside the drama proper; but cases occur where it falls
within the action of the play: one may cite the Alcmaeon of Astydamas,
or Telegonus in the Wounded Odysseus. Again, there is a third case,--<to
be about to act with knowledge of the persons and then not to act. The
fourth case is> when some one is about to do an irreparable deed through
ignorance, and makes the discovery before it is done. These are the only
possible ways. For the deed must either be done or not done,--and that
wittingly or unwittingly. But of all these ways, to be about to act
knowing the persons, and then not to act, is the worst. It is shocking
without being tragic, for no disaster follows. It is, therefore, never,
or very rarely, found in poetry. One instance, however, is in the
Antigone, where Haemon threatens to kill Creon. The next and better way
is that the deed should be perpetrated. Still better, that it should be
perpetrated in ignorance, and the discovery made afterwards. There
is then nothing to shock us, while the discovery produces a startling
effect. The last case is the best, as when in the Cresphontes Merope is
about to slay her son, but, recognising who he is, spares his life. So
in the Iphigenia, the sister recognises the brother just in time. Again
in the Helle, the son recognises the mother when on the point of giving
her up. This, then, is why a few families only, as has been already
observed, furnish the subjects of tragedy. It was not art, but happy
chance, that led the poets in search of subjects to impress the tragic
quality upon their plots. They are compelled, therefore, to have
recourse to those houses whose history contains moving incidents like
these.

Enough has now been said concerning the structure of the incidents, and
the right kind of plot.




XV

In respect of Character there are four things to be aimed at. First, and
most important, it must be good. Now any speech or action that manifests
moral purpose of any kind will be expressive of character: the character
will be good if the purpose is good. This rule is relative to each
class. Even a woman may be good, and also a slave; though the woman
may be said to be an inferior being, and the slave quite worthless. The
second thing to aim at is propriety. There is a type of manly valour;
but valour in a woman, or unscrupulous cleverness, is inappropriate.
Thirdly, character must be true to life: for this is a distinct thing
from goodness and propriety, as here described. The fourth point is
consistency: for though the subject of the imitation, who suggested the
type, be inconsistent, still he must be consistently inconsistent. As an
example of motiveless degradation of character, we have Menelaus in
the Orestes: of character indecorous and inappropriate, the lament of
Odysseus in the Scylla, and the speech of Melanippe: of inconsistency,
the Iphigenia at Aulis,--for Iphigenia the suppliant in no way resembles
her later self.

As in the structure of the plot, so too in the portraiture of character,
the poet should always aim either at the necessary or the probable. Thus
a person of a given character should speak or act in a given way, by the
rule either of necessity or of probability; just as this event should
follow that by necessary or probable sequence. It is therefore evident
that the unravelling of the plot, no less than the complication, must
arise out of the plot itself, it must not be brought about by the 'Deus
ex Machina'--as in the Medea, or in the Return of the Greeks in the
Iliad. The 'Deus ex Machina' should be employed only for events external
to the drama,--for antecedent or subsequent events, which lie beyond the
range of human knowledge, and which require to be reported or foretold;
for to the gods we ascribe the power of seeing all things. Within the
action there must be nothing irrational. If the irrational cannot be
excluded, it should be outside the scope of the tragedy. Such is the
irrational element in the Oedipus of Sophocles.

Again, since Tragedy is an imitation of persons who are above the common
level, the example of good portrait-painters should be followed. They,
while reproducing the distinctive form of the original, make a likeness
which is true to life and yet more beautiful. So too the poet, in
representing men who are irascible or indolent, or have other defects
of character, should preserve the type and yet ennoble it. In this way
Achilles is portrayed by Agathon and Homer.

These then are rules the poet should observe. Nor should he neglect
those appeals to the senses, which, though not among the essentials, are
the concomitants of poetry; for here too there is much room for error.
But of this enough has been said in our published treatises.




XVI

What Recognition is has been already explained. We will now enumerate
its kinds.

First, the least artistic form, which, from poverty of wit, is
most commonly employed recognition by signs. Of these some are
congenital,--such as 'the spear which the earth-born race bear on their
bodies,' or the stars introduced by Carcinus in his Thyestes. Others are
acquired after birth; and of these some are bodily marks, as scars; some
external tokens, as necklaces, or the little ark in the Tyro by which
the discovery is effected. Even these admit of more or less skilful
treatment. Thus in the recognition of Odysseus by his scar, the
discovery is made in one way by the nurse, in another by the swineherds.
The use of tokens for the express purpose of proof--and, indeed,
any formal proof with or without tokens--is a less artistic mode of
recognition. A better kind is that which comes about by a turn of
incident, as in the Bath Scene in the Odyssey.

Next come the recognitions invented at will by the poet, and on that
account wanting in art. For example, Orestes in the Iphigenia reveals
the fact that he is Orestes. She, indeed, makes herself known by the
letter; but he, by speaking himself, and saying what the poet, not what
the plot requires. This, therefore, is nearly allied to the fault above
mentioned:--for Orestes might as well have brought tokens with him.
Another similar instance is the 'voice of the shuttle' in the Tereus of
Sophocles.

The third kind depends on memory when the sight of some object awakens
a feeling: as in the Cyprians of Dicaeogenes, where the hero breaks into
tears on seeing the picture; or again in the 'Lay of Alcinous,' where
Odysseus, hearing the minstrel play the lyre, recalls the past and
weeps; and hence the recognition.

The fourth kind is by process of reasoning. Thus in the Choephori: 'Some
one resembling me has come: no one resembles me but Orestes: therefore
Orestes has come.' Such too is the discovery made by Iphigenia in the
play of Polyidus the Sophist. It was a natural reflection for Orestes to
make, 'So I too must die at the altar like my sister.' So, again, in
the Tydeus of Theodectes, the father says, 'I came to find my son, and
I lose my own life.' So too in the Phineidae: the women, on seeing the
place, inferred their fate:--'Here we are doomed to die, for here
we were cast forth.' Again, there is a composite kind of recognition
involving false inference on the part of one of the characters, as in
the Odysseus Disguised as a Messenger. A said <that no one else was able
to bend the bow;... hence B (the disguised Odysseus) imagined that A
would> recognise the bow which, in fact, he had not seen; and to bring
about a recognition by this means that the expectation A would recognise
the bow is false inference.

But, of all recognitions, the best is that which arises from the
incidents themselves, where the startling discovery is made by natural
means. Such is that in the Oedipus of Sophocles, and in the Iphigenia;
for it was natural that Iphigenia should wish to dispatch a letter.
These recognitions alone dispense with the artificial aid of tokens or
amulets. Next come the recognitions by process of reasoning.




XVII

In constructing the plot and working it out with the proper diction,
the poet should place the scene, as far as possible, before his eyes. In
this way, seeing everything with the utmost vividness, as if he were a
spectator of the action, he will discover what is in keeping with it,
and be most unlikely to overlook inconsistencies. The need of such a
rule is shown by the fault found in Carcinus. Amphiaraus was on his way
from the temple. This fact escaped the observation of one who did not
see the situation. On the stage, however, the piece failed, the audience
being offended at the oversight.

Again, the poet should work out his play, to the best of his power, with
appropriate gestures; for those who feel emotion are most convincing
through natural sympathy with the characters they represent; and one
who is agitated storms, one who is angry rages, with the most life-like
reality. Hence poetry implies either a happy gift of nature or a strain
of madness. In the one case a man can take the mould of any character;
in the other, he is lifted out of his proper self.

As for the story, whether the poet takes it ready made or constructs it
for himself, he should first sketch its general outline, and then
fill in the episodes and amplify in detail. The general plan may be
illustrated by the Iphigenia. A young girl is sacrificed; she disappears
mysteriously from the eyes of those who sacrificed her; She is
transported to another country, where the custom is to offer up all
strangers to the goddess. To this ministry she is appointed. Some time
later her own brother chances to arrive. The fact that the oracle for
some reason ordered him to go there, is outside the general plan of the
play. The purpose, again, of his coming is outside the action proper.
However, he comes, he is seized, and, when on the point of being
sacrificed, reveals who he is. The mode of recognition may be either
that of Euripides or of Polyidus, in whose play he exclaims very
naturally:--'So it was not my sister only, but I too, who was doomed to
be sacrificed'; and by that remark he is saved.

After this, the names being once given, it remains to fill in the
episodes. We must see that they are relevant to the action. In the case
of Orestes, for example, there is the madness which led to his capture,
and his deliverance by means of the purificatory rite. In the drama, the
episodes are short, but it is these that give extension to Epic poetry.
Thus the story of the Odyssey can be stated briefly. A certain man is
absent from home for many years; he is jealously watched by Poseidon,
and left desolate. Meanwhile his home is in a wretched plight--suitors
are wasting his substance and plotting against his son. At length,
tempest-tost, he himself arrives; he makes certain persons acquainted
with him; he attacks the suitors with his own hand, and is himself
preserved while he destroys them. This is the essence of the plot; the
rest is episode.




XVIII

Every tragedy falls into two parts,--Complication and Unravelling or
Denouement. Incidents extraneous to the action are frequently combined
with a portion of the action proper, to form the Complication; the rest
is the Unravelling. By the Complication I mean all that extends from
the beginning of the action to the part which marks the turning-point
to good or bad fortune. The Unravelling is that which extends from the
beginning of the change to the end. Thus, in the Lynceus of Theodectes,
the Complication consists of the incidents presupposed in the drama, the
seizure of the child, and then again, The Unravelling extends from
the accusation of murder to the end.

There are four kinds of Tragedy, the Complex, depending entirely on
Reversal of the Situation and Recognition; the Pathetic (where the
motive is passion),--such as the tragedies on Ajax and Ixion; the
Ethical (where the motives are ethical),--such as the Phthiotides and
the Peleus. The fourth kind is the Simple <We here exclude the purely
spectacular element>, exemplified by the Phorcides, the Prometheus, and
scenes laid in Hades. The poet should endeavour, if possible, to combine
all poetic elements; or failing that, the greatest number and those the
most important; the more so, in face of the cavilling criticism of the
day. For whereas there have hitherto been good poets, each in his own
branch, the critics now expect one man to surpass all others in their
several lines of excellence.

In speaking of a tragedy as the same or different, the best test to take
is the plot. Identity exists where the Complication and Unravelling are
the same. Many poets tie the knot well, but unravel it ill. Both arts,
however, should always be mastered.

Again, the poet should remember what has been often said, and not make
an Epic structure into a Tragedy--by an Epic structure I mean one with
a multiplicity of plots--as if, for instance, you were to make a tragedy
out of the entire story of the Iliad. In the Epic poem, owing to its
length, each part assumes its proper magnitude. In the drama the result
is far from answering to the poet's expectation. The proof is that the
poets who have dramatised the whole story of the Fall of Troy, instead
of selecting portions, like Euripides; or who have taken the whole
tale of Niobe, and not a part of her story, like Aeschylus, either fail
utterly or meet with poor success on the stage. Even Agathon has been
known to fail from this one defect. In his Reversals of the Situation,
however, he shows a marvellous skill in the effort to hit the popular
taste,--to produce a tragic effect that satisfies the moral sense. This
effect is produced when the clever rogue, like Sisyphus, is outwitted,
or the brave villain defeated. Such an event is probable in Agathon's
sense of the word: 'it is probable,' he says, 'that many things should
happen contrary to probability.'

The Chorus too should be regarded as one of the actors; it should be an
integral part of the whole, and share in the action, in the manner not
of Euripides but of Sophocles. As for the later poets, their choral
songs pertain as little to the subject of the piece as to that of any
other tragedy. They are, therefore, sung as mere interludes, a practice
first begun by Agathon. Yet what difference is there between introducing
such choral interludes, and transferring a speech, or even a whole act,
from one play to another?




XIX

It remains to speak of Diction and Thought, the other parts of Tragedy
having been already discussed. Concerning Thought, we may assume what
is said in the Rhetoric, to which inquiry the subject more strictly
belongs. Under Thought is included every effect which has to be produced
by speech, the subdivisions being,--proof and refutation; the excitation
of the feelings, such as pity, fear, anger, and the like; the suggestion
of importance or its opposite. Now, it is evident that the dramatic
incidents must be treated from the same points of view as the dramatic
speeches, when the object is to evoke the sense of pity, fear,
importance, or probability. The only difference is, that the incidents
should speak for themselves without verbal exposition; while the effects
aimed at in speech should be produced by the speaker, and as a result of
the speech. For what were the business of a speaker, if the Thought were
revealed quite apart from what he says?

Next, as regards Diction. One branch of the inquiry treats of the Modes
of Utterance. But this province of knowledge belongs to the art
of Delivery and to the masters of that science. It includes, for
instance,--what is a command, a prayer, a statement, a threat, a
question, an answer, and so forth. To know or not to know these things
involves no serious censure upon the poet's art. For who can admit
the fault imputed to Homer by Protagoras,--that in the words, 'Sing,
goddess, of the wrath,' he gives a command under the idea that he utters
a prayer? For to tell some one to do a thing or not to do it is, he
says, a command. We may, therefore, pass this over as an inquiry that
belongs to another art, not to poetry.




XX

[Language in general includes the following parts:--Letter, Syllable,
Connecting word, Noun, Verb, Inflexion or Case, Sentence or Phrase.

A Letter is an indivisible sound, yet not every such sound, but only
one which can form part of a group of sounds. For even brutes utter
indivisible sounds, none of which I call a letter. The sound I mean
may be either a vowel, a semi-vowel, or a mute. A vowel is that which
without impact of tongue or lip has an audible sound. A semi-vowel, that
which with such impact has an audible sound, as S and R. A mute, that
which with such impact has by itself no sound, but joined to a vowel
sound becomes audible, as G and D. These are distinguished according
to the form assumed by the mouth and the place where they are produced;
according as they are aspirated or smooth, long or short; as they are
acute, grave, or of an intermediate tone; which inquiry belongs in
detail to the writers on metre.

A Syllable is a non-significant sound, composed of a mute and a
vowel: for GR without A is a syllable, as also with A,--GRA. But the
investigation of these differences belongs also to metrical science.

A Connecting word is a non-significant sound, which neither causes nor
hinders the union of many sounds into one significant sound; it may
be placed at either end or in the middle of a sentence. Or, a
non-significant sound, which out of several sounds, each of them
significant, is capable of forming one significant sound,--as {alpha mu
theta iota}, {pi epsilon rho iota}, and the like. Or, a non-significant
sound, which marks the beginning, end, or division of a sentence; such,
however, that it cannot correctly stand by itself at the beginning of a
sentence, as {mu epsilon nu}, {eta tau omicron iota}, {delta epsilon}.

A Noun is a composite significant sound, not marking time, of which no
part is in itself significant: for in double or compound words we do not
employ the separate parts as if each were in itself significant. Thus
in Theodorus, 'god-given,' the {delta omega rho omicron nu} or 'gift' is
not in itself significant.

A Verb is a composite significant sound, marking time, in which, as in
the noun, no part is in itself significant. For 'man,' or 'white' does
not express the idea of 'when'; but 'he walks,' or 'he has walked' does
connote time, present or past.

Inflexion belongs both to the noun and verb, and expresses either the
relation 'of,' 'to,' or the like; or that of number, whether one or
many, as 'man' or 'men '; or the modes or tones in actual delivery, e.g.
a question or a command. 'Did he go?' and 'go' are verbal inflexions of
this kind.

A Sentence or Phrase is a composite significant sound, some at least of
whose parts are in themselves significant; for not every such group
of words consists of verbs and nouns--'the definition of man,' for
example--but it may dispense even with the verb. Still it will always
have some significant part, as 'in walking,' or 'Cleon son of Cleon.' A
sentence or phrase may form a unity in two ways,--either as signifying
one thing, or as consisting of several parts linked together. Thus the
Iliad is one by the linking together of parts, the definition of man by
the unity of the thing signified.]




XXI

Words are of two kinds, simple and double. By simple I mean those
composed of non-significant elements, such as {gamma eta}. By double
or compound, those composed either of a significant and non-significant
element (though within the whole word no element is significant), or
of elements that are both significant. A word may likewise be triple,
quadruple, or multiple in form, like so many Massilian expressions, e.g.
'Hermo-caico-xanthus who prayed to Father Zeus>.'

Every word is either current, or strange, or metaphorical, or
ornamental, or newly-coined, or lengthened, or contracted, or altered.

By a current or proper word I mean one which is in general use among
a people; by a strange word, one which is in use in another country.
Plainly, therefore, the same word may be at once strange and current,
but not in relation to the same people. The word {sigma iota gamma
upsilon nu omicron nu}, 'lance,' is to the Cyprians a current term but
to us a strange one.

Metaphor is the application of an alien name by transference either from
genus to species, or from species to genus, or from species to species,
or by analogy, that is, proportion. Thus from genus to species, as:
'There lies my ship'; for lying at anchor is a species of lying. From
species to genus, as: 'Verily ten thousand noble deeds hath Odysseus
wrought'; for ten thousand is a species of large number, and is here
used for a large number generally. From species to species, as: 'With
blade of bronze drew away the life,' and 'Cleft the water with the
vessel of unyielding bronze.' Here {alpha rho upsilon rho alpha iota},
'to draw away,' is used for {tau alpha mu epsilon iota nu}, 'to cleave,'
and {tau alpha mu epsilon iota nu} again for {alpha rho upsilon alpha
iota},--each being a species of taking away. Analogy or proportion is
when the second term is to the first as the fourth to the third. We
may then use the fourth for the second, or the second for the fourth.
Sometimes too we qualify the metaphor by adding the term to which the
proper word is relative. Thus the cup is to Dionysus as the shield to
Ares. The cup may, therefore, be called 'the shield of Dionysus,' and
the shield 'the cup of Ares.' Or, again, as old age is to life, so is
evening to day. Evening may therefore be called 'the old age of
the day,' and old age, 'the evening of life,' or, in the phrase
of Empedocles, 'life's setting sun.' For some of the terms of the
proportion there is at times no word in existence; still the metaphor
may be used. For instance, to scatter seed is called sowing: but the
action of the sun in scattering his rays is nameless. Still this process
bears to the sun the same relation as sowing to the seed. Hence the
expression of the poet 'sowing the god-created light.' There is another
way in which this kind of metaphor may be employed. We may apply an
alien term, and then deny of that term one of its proper attributes; as
if we were to call the shield, not 'the cup of Ares,' but 'the wineless
cup.'

{An ornamental word...}

A newly-coined word is one which has never been even in local use, but
is adopted by the poet himself. Some such words there appear to be: as
{epsilon rho nu upsilon gamma epsilon sigma}, 'sprouters,' for {kappa
epsilon rho alpha tau alpha}, 'horns,' and {alpha rho eta tau eta rho},
'supplicator,' for {iota epsilon rho epsilon upsilon sigma}, 'priest.'

A word is lengthened when its own vowel is exchanged for a longer one,
or when a syllable is inserted. A word is contracted when some part of
it is removed. Instances of lengthening are,--{pi omicron lambda eta
omicron sigma} for {pi omicron lambda epsilon omega sigma}, and {Pi eta
lambda eta iota alpha delta epsilon omega} for {Pi eta lambda epsilon
iota delta omicron upsilon}: of contraction,--{kappa rho iota}, {delta
omega}, and {omicron psi}, as in {mu iota alpha / gamma iota nu epsilon
tau alpha iota / alpha mu phi omicron tau episilon rho omega nu /
omicron psi}.

An altered word is one in which part of the ordinary form is left
unchanged, and part is re-cast; as in {delta epsilon xi iota-tau epsilon
rho omicron nu / kappa alpha tau alpha / mu alpha zeta omicron nu},
{delta epsilon xi iota tau epsilon rho omicron nu} is for {delta epsilon
xi iota omicron nu}.

[Nouns in themselves are either masculine, feminine, or neuter.
Masculine are such as end in {nu}, {rho}, {sigma}, or in some letter
compounded with {sigma},--these being two, and {xi}. Feminine, such as
end in vowels that are always long, namely {eta} and {omega}, and--of
vowels that admit of lengthening--those in {alpha}. Thus the number of
letters in which nouns masculine and feminine end is the same; for {psi}
and {xi} are equivalent to endings in {sigma}. No noun ends in a mute
or a vowel short by nature. Three only end in {iota},--{mu eta lambda
iota}, {kappa omicron mu mu iota}, {pi epsilon pi epsilon rho iota}:
five end in {upsilon}. Neuter nouns end in these two latter vowels; also
in {nu} and {sigma}.]




XXII

The perfection of style is to be clear without being mean. The clearest
style is that which uses only current or proper words; at the same
time it is mean:--witness the poetry of Cleophon and of Sthenelus. That
diction, on the other hand, is lofty and raised above the commonplace
which employs unusual words. By unusual, I mean strange (or rare) words,
metaphorical, lengthened,--anything, in short, that differs from the
normal idiom. Yet a style wholly composed of such words is either a
riddle or a jargon; a riddle, if it consists of metaphors; a jargon, if
it consists of strange (or rare) words. For the essence of a riddle is
to express true facts under impossible combinations. Now this cannot be
done by any arrangement of ordinary words, but by the use of metaphor it
can. Such is the riddle:--'A man I saw who on another man had glued the
bronze by aid of fire,' and others of the same kind. A diction that
is made up of strange (or rare) terms is a jargon. A certain infusion,
therefore, of these elements is necessary to style; for the strange (or
rare) word, the metaphorical, the ornamental, and the other kinds above
mentioned, will raise it above the commonplace and mean, while the use
of proper words will make it perspicuous. But nothing contributes more
to produce a clearness of diction that is remote from commonness than
the lengthening, contraction, and alteration of words. For by deviating
in exceptional cases from the normal idiom, the language will gain
distinction; while, at the same time, the partial conformity with usage
will give perspicuity. The critics, therefore, are in error who censure
these licenses of speech, and hold the author up to ridicule. Thus
Eucleides, the elder, declared that it would be an easy matter to be
a poet if you might lengthen syllables at will. He caricatured the
practice in the very form of his diction, as in the verse: '{Epsilon pi
iota chi alpha rho eta nu / epsilon iota delta omicron nu / Mu alpha rho
alpha theta omega nu alpha delta epsilon / Beta alpha delta iota zeta
omicron nu tau alpha}, or, {omicron upsilon kappa / alpha nu / gamma /
epsilon rho alpha mu epsilon nu omicron sigma / tau omicron nu / epsilon
kappa epsilon iota nu omicron upsilon /epsilon lambda lambda epsilon
beta omicron rho omicron nu}. To employ such license at all obtrusively
is, no doubt, grotesque; but in any mode of poetic diction there must
be moderation. Even metaphors, strange (or rare) words, or any similar
forms of speech, would produce the like effect if used without propriety
and with the express purpose of being ludicrous. How great a difference
is made by the appropriate use of lengthening, may be seen in Epic
poetry by the insertion of ordinary forms in the verse. So, again, if
we take a strange (or rare) word, a metaphor, or any similar mode of
expression, and replace it by the current or proper term, the truth of
our observation will be manifest. For example Aeschylus and Euripides
each composed the same iambic line. But the alteration of a single word
by Euripides, who employed the rarer term instead of the ordinary one,
makes one verse appear beautiful and the other trivial. Aeschylus in his
Philoctetes says: {Phi alpha gamma epsilon delta alpha iota nu alpha /
delta / eta / mu omicron upsilon / sigma alpha rho kappa alpha sigma /
epsilon rho theta iota epsilon iota / pi omicron delta omicron sigma}.

Euripides substitutes {Theta omicron iota nu alpha tau alpha iota}
'feasts on' for {epsilon sigma theta iota epsilon iota} 'feeds on.'
Again, in the line, {nu upsilon nu / delta epsilon / mu /epsilon omega
nu / omicron lambda iota gamma iota gamma upsilon sigma / tau epsilon /
kappa alpha iota / omicron upsilon tau iota delta alpha nu omicron sigma
/ kappa alpha iota / alpha epsilon iota kappa eta sigma), the difference
will be felt if we substitute the common words, {nu upsilon nu / delta
epsilon / mu / epsilon omega nu / mu iota kappa rho omicron sigma /
tau epsilon / kappa alpha iota / alpha rho theta epsilon nu iota kappa
omicron sigma / kappa alpha iota / alpha epsilon iota delta gamma
sigma}. Or, if for the line, {delta iota phi rho omicron nu / alpha
epsilon iota kappa epsilon lambda iota omicron nu / kappa alpha tau
alpha theta epsilon iota sigma / omicron lambda iota gamma eta nu /
tau epsilon / tau rho alpha pi epsilon iota sigma / omicron lambda iota
gamma eta nu / tau epsilon / tau rho alpha pi epsilon zeta alpha nu,}
We read, {delta iota phi rho omicron nu / mu omicron chi theta eta rho
omicron nu / kappa alpha tau alpha theta epsilon iota sigma / mu iota
kappa rho alpha nu / tau epsilon / tau rho alpha pi epsilon zeta alpha
nu}.

Or, for {eta iota omicron nu epsilon sigma / beta omicron omicron omega
rho iota nu, eta iota omicron nu epsilon sigma kappa rho alpha zeta
omicron upsilon rho iota nu}

Again, Ariphrades ridiculed the tragedians for using phrases which no
one would employ in ordinary speech: for example, {delta omega mu alpha
tau omega nu / alpha pi omicron} instead of {alpha pi omicron / delta
omega mu alpha tau omega nu}, {rho epsilon theta epsilon nu}, {epsilon
gamma omega / delta epsilon / nu iota nu}, {Alpha chi iota lambda lambda
epsilon omega sigma / pi epsilon rho iota} instead of {pi epsilon rho
iota / 'Alpha chi iota lambda lambda epsilon omega sigma}, and the like.
It is precisely because such phrases are not part of the current idiom
that they give distinction to the style. This, however, he failed to
see.

It is a great matter to observe propriety in these several modes of
expression, as also in compound words, strange (or rare) words, and so
forth. But the greatest thing by far is to have a command of metaphor.
This alone cannot be imparted by another; it is the mark of genius, for
to make good metaphors implies an eye for resemblances.

Of the various kinds of words, the compound are best adapted to
Dithyrambs, rare words to heroic poetry, metaphors to iambic. In heroic
poetry, indeed, all these varieties are serviceable. But in iambic
verse, which reproduces, as far as may be, familiar speech, the most
appropriate words are those which are found even in prose. These
are,--the current or proper, the metaphorical, the ornamental.

Concerning Tragedy and imitation by means of action this may suffice.




XXIII

As to that poetic imitation which is narrative in form and employs
a single metre, the plot manifestly ought, as in a tragedy, to be
constructed on dramatic principles. It should have for its subject a
single action, whole and complete, with a beginning, a middle, and
an end. It will thus resemble a living organism in all its unity, and
produce the pleasure proper to it. It will differ in structure from
historical compositions, which of necessity present not a single action,
but a single period, and all that happened within that period to one
person or to many, little connected together as the events may be. For
as the sea-fight at Salamis and the battle with the Carthaginians in
Sicily took place at the same time, but did not tend to any one result,
so in the sequence of events, one thing sometimes follows another, and
yet no single result is thereby produced. Such is the practice, we may
say, of most poets. Here again, then, as has been already observed, the
transcendent excellence of Homer is manifest. He never attempts to make
the whole war of Troy the subject of his poem, though that war had
a beginning and an end. It would have been too vast a theme, and not
easily embraced in a single view. If, again, he had kept it within
moderate limits, it must have been over-complicated by the variety of
the incidents. As it is, he detaches a single portion, and admits as
episodes many events from the general story of the war--such as the
Catalogue of the ships and others--thus diversifying the poem. All other
poets take a single hero, a single period, or an action single indeed,
but with a multiplicity of parts. Thus did the author of the Cypria
and of the Little Iliad. For this reason the Iliad and the Odyssey
each furnish the subject of one tragedy, or, at most, of two; while the
Cypria supplies materials for many, and the Little Iliad for eight--the
Award of the Arms, the Philoctetes, the Neoptolemus, the Eurypylus, the
Mendicant Odysseus, the Laconian Women, the Fall of Ilium, the Departure
of the Fleet.




XXIV

Again, Epic poetry must have as many kinds as Tragedy: it must be
simple, or complex, or 'ethical,' or 'pathetic.' The parts also, with
the exception of song and spectacle, are the same; for it requires
Reversals of the Situation, Recognitions, and Scenes of Suffering.
Moreover, the thoughts and the diction must be artistic. In all these
respects Homer is our earliest and sufficient model. Indeed each of
his poems has a twofold character. The Iliad is at once simple and
'pathetic,' and the Odyssey complex (for Recognition scenes run through
it), and at the same time 'ethical.' Moreover, in diction and thought
they are supreme.

Epic poetry differs from Tragedy in the scale on which it is
constructed, and in its metre. As regards scale or length, we have
already laid down an adequate limit:--the beginning and the end must be
capable of being brought within a single view. This condition will be
satisfied by poems on a smaller scale than the old epics, and answering
in length to the group of tragedies presented at a single sitting.

Epic poetry has, however, a great--a special--capacity for enlarging
its dimensions, and we can see the reason. In Tragedy we cannot imitate
several lines of actions carried on at one and the same time; we must
confine ourselves to the action on the stage and the part taken by the
players. But in Epic poetry, owing to the narrative form, many events
simultaneously transacted can be presented; and these, if relevant to
the subject, add mass and dignity to the poem. The Epic has here an
advantage, and one that conduces to grandeur of effect, to diverting the
mind of the hearer, and relieving the story with varying episodes. For
sameness of incident soon produces satiety, and makes tragedies fail on
the stage.

As for the metre, the heroic measure has proved its fitness by the test
of experience. If a narrative poem in any other metre or in many metres
were now composed, it would be found incongruous. For of all measures
the heroic is the stateliest and the most massive; and hence it most
readily admits rare words and metaphors, which is another point in which
the narrative form of imitation stands alone. On the other hand, the
iambic and the trochaic tetrameter are stirring measures, the latter
being akin to dancing, the former expressive of action. Still more
absurd would it be to mix together different metres, as was done by
Chaeremon. Hence no one has ever composed a poem on a great scale in any
other than heroic verse. Nature herself, as we have said, teaches the
choice of the proper measure.

Homer, admirable in all respects, has the special merit of being the
only poet who rightly appreciates the part he should take himself. The
poet should speak as little as possible in his own person, for it is not
this that makes him an imitator. Other poets appear themselves upon the
scene throughout, and imitate but little and rarely. Homer, after a few
prefatory words, at once brings in a man, or woman, or other personage;
none of them wanting in characteristic qualities, but each with a
character of his own.

The element of the wonderful is required in Tragedy. The irrational, on
which the wonderful depends for its chief effects, has wider scope in
Epic poetry, because there the person acting is not seen. Thus, the
pursuit of Hector would be ludicrous if placed upon the stage--the
Greeks standing still and not joining in the pursuit, and Achilles
waving them back. But in the Epic poem the absurdity passes unnoticed.
Now the wonderful is pleasing: as may be inferred from the fact that
every one tells a story with some addition of his own, knowing that his
hearers like it. It is Homer who has chiefly taught other poets the
art of telling lies skilfully. The secret of it lies in a fallacy, For,
assuming that if one thing is or becomes, a second is or becomes, men
imagine that, if the second is, the first likewise is or becomes. But
this is a false inference. Hence, where the first thing is untrue, it is
quite unnecessary, provided the second be true, to add that the first
is or has become. For the mind, knowing the second to be true, falsely
infers the truth of the first. There is an example of this in the Bath
Scene of the Odyssey.

Accordingly, the poet should prefer probable impossibilities to
improbable possibilities. The tragic plot must not be composed of
irrational parts. Everything irrational should, if possible, be
excluded; or, at all events, it should lie outside the action of the
play (as, in the Oedipus, the hero's ignorance as to the manner of
Laius' death); not within the drama,--as in the Electra, the messenger's
account of the Pythian games; or, as in the Mysians, the man who
has come from Tegea to Mysia and is still speechless. The plea that
otherwise the plot would have been ruined, is ridiculous; such a plot
should not in the first instance be constructed. But once the irrational
has been introduced and an air of likelihood imparted to it, we must
accept it in spite of the absurdity. Take even the irrational incidents
in the Odyssey, where Odysseus is left upon the shore of Ithaca. How
intolerable even these might have been would be apparent if an inferior
poet were to treat the subject. As it is, the absurdity is veiled by the
poetic charm with which the poet invests it.

The diction should be elaborated in the pauses of the action, where
there is no expression of character or thought. For, conversely,
character and thought are merely obscured by a diction that is over
brilliant.




XXV

With respect to critical difficulties and their solutions, the number
and nature of the sources from which they may be drawn may be thus
exhibited.

The poet being an imitator, like a painter or any other artist, must
of necessity imitate one of three objects,--things as they were or are,
things as they are said or thought to be, or things as they ought to be.
The vehicle of expression is language,--either current terms or, it
may be, rare words or metaphors. There are also many modifications of
language, which we concede to the poets. Add to this, that the standard
of correctness is not the same in poetry and politics, any more than in
poetry and any other art. Within the art of poetry itself there are
two kinds of faults, those which touch its essence, and those which are
accidental. If a poet has chosen to imitate something, <but has imitated
it incorrectly> through want of capacity, the error is inherent in
the poetry. But if the failure is due to a wrong choice if he has
represented a horse as throwing out both his off legs at once, or
introduced technical inaccuracies in medicine, for example, or in any
other art the error is not essential to the poetry. These are the points
of view from which we should consider and answer the objections raised
by the critics.

First as to matters which concern the poet's own art. If he describes
the impossible, he is guilty of an error; but the error may be
justified, if the end of the art be thereby attained (the end being that
already mentioned), if, that is, the effect of this or any other part of
the poem is thus rendered more striking. A case in point is the pursuit
of Hector. If, however, the end might have been as well, or better,
attained without violating the special rules of the poetic art, the
error is not justified: for every kind of error should, if possible, be
avoided.

Again, does the error touch the essentials of the poetic art, or some
accident of it? For example,--not to know that a hind has no horns is a
less serious matter than to paint it inartistically.

Further, if it be objected that the description is not true to fact, the
poet may perhaps reply,--'But the objects are as they ought to be': just
as Sophocles said that he drew men as they ought to be; Euripides,
as they are. In this way the objection may be met. If, however, the
representation be of neither kind, the poet may answer,--This is how men
say the thing is.' This applies to tales about the gods. It may well be
that these stories are not higher than fact nor yet true to fact: they
are, very possibly, what Xenophanes says of them. But anyhow, 'this
is what is said.' Again, a description may be no better than the fact:
'still, it was the fact'; as in the passage about the arms: 'Upright
upon their butt-ends stood the spears.' This was the custom then, as it
now is among the Illyrians.

Again, in examining whether what has been said or done by some one is
poetically right or not, we must not look merely to the particular act
or saying, and ask whether it is poetically good or bad. We must also
consider by whom it is said or done, to whom, when, by what means, or
for what end; whether, for instance, it be to secure a greater good, or
avert a greater evil.

Other difficulties may be resolved by due regard to the usage of
language. We may note a rare word, as in {omicron upsilon rho eta alpha
sigma / mu epsilon nu / pi rho omega tau omicron nu}, where the poet
perhaps employs {omicron upsilon rho eta alpha sigma} not in the sense
of mules, but of sentinels. So, again, of Dolon: 'ill-favoured indeed
he was to look upon.' It is not meant that his body was ill-shaped, but
that his face was ugly; for the Cretans use the word {epsilon upsilon
epsilon iota delta epsilon sigma}, 'well-favoured,' to denote a fair
face. Again, {zeta omega rho omicron tau epsilon rho omicron nu /
delta epsilon / kappa epsilon rho alpha iota epsilon}, 'mix the drink
livelier,' does not mean `mix it stronger' as for hard drinkers, but
'mix it quicker.'

Sometimes an expression is metaphorical, as 'Now all gods and men were
sleeping through the night,'--while at the same time the poet says:
'Often indeed as he turned his gaze to the Trojan plain, he marvelled
at the sound of flutes and pipes.' 'All' is here used metaphorically for
'many,' all being a species of many. So in the verse,--'alone she hath
no part...,' {omicron iota eta}, 'alone,' is metaphorical; for the best
known may be called the only one.

Again, the solution may depend upon accent or breathing. Thus Hippias of
Thasos solved the difficulties in the lines,--{delta iota delta omicron
mu epsilon nu (delta iota delta omicron mu epsilon nu) delta epsilon
/ omicron iota,} and { tau omicron / mu epsilon nu / omicron upsilon
(omicron upsilon) kappa alpha tau alpha pi upsilon theta epsilon tau
alpha iota / omicron mu beta rho omega}.

Or again, the question may be solved by punctuation, as in
Empedocles,--'Of a sudden things became mortal that before had learnt to
be immortal, and things unmixed before mixed.'

Or again, by ambiguity of meaning,--as {pi alpha rho omega chi eta kappa
epsilon nu / delta epsilon / pi lambda epsilon omega / nu upsilon xi},
where the word {pi lambda epsilon omega} is ambiguous.

Or by the usage of language. Thus any mixed drink is called {omicron
iota nu omicron sigma}, 'wine.' Hence Ganymede is said 'to pour the wine
to Zeus,' though the gods do not drink wine. So too workers in iron
are called {chi alpha lambda kappa epsilon alpha sigma}, or workers in
bronze. This, however, may also be taken as a metaphor.

Again, when a word seems to involve some inconsistency of meaning, we
should consider how many senses it may bear in the particular passage.
For example: 'there was stayed the spear of bronze'--we should ask
in how many ways we may take 'being checked there.' The true mode
of interpretation is the precise opposite of what Glaucon mentions.
Critics, he says, jump at certain groundless conclusions; they pass
adverse judgment and then proceed to reason on it; and, assuming that
the poet has said whatever they happen to think, find fault if a thing
is inconsistent with their own fancy. The question about Icarius
has been treated in this fashion. The critics imagine he was a
Lacedaemonian. They think it strange, therefore, that Telemachus should
not have met him when he went to Lacedaemon. But the Cephallenian story
may perhaps be the true one. They allege that Odysseus took a wife from
among themselves, and that her father was Icadius not Icarius. It is
merely a mistake, then, that gives plausibility to the objection.

In general, the impossible must be justified by reference to artistic
requirements, or to the higher reality, or to received opinion. With
respect to the requirements of art, a probable impossibility is to
be preferred to a thing improbable and yet possible. Again, it may be
impossible that there should be men such as Zeuxis painted. 'Yes,' we
say, 'but the impossible is the higher thing; for the ideal type must
surpass the reality.' To justify the irrational, we appeal to what is
commonly said to be. In addition to which, we urge that the irrational
sometimes does not violate reason; just as 'it is probable that a thing
may happen contrary to probability.'

Things that sound contradictory should be examined by the same rules as
in dialectical refutation whether the same thing is meant, in the same
relation, and in the same sense. We should therefore solve the question
by reference to what the poet says himself, or to what is tacitly
assumed by a person of intelligence.

The element of the irrational, and, similarly, depravity of character,
are justly censured when there is no inner necessity for introducing
them. Such is the irrational element in the introduction of Aegeus by
Euripides and the badness of Menelaus in the Orestes.

Thus, there are five sources from which critical objections are drawn.
Things are censured either as impossible, or irrational, or morally
hurtful, or contradictory, or contrary to artistic correctness. The
answers should be sought under the twelve heads above mentioned.




XXVI

The question may be raised whether the Epic or Tragic mode of imitation
is the higher. If the more refined art is the higher, and the more
refined in every case is that which appeals to the better sort of
audience, the art which imitates anything and everything is manifestly
most unrefined. The audience is supposed to be too dull to comprehend
unless something of their own is thrown in by the performers, who
therefore indulge in restless movements. Bad flute-players twist and
twirl, if they have to represent 'the quoit-throw,' or hustle the
coryphaeus when they perform the 'Scylla.' Tragedy, it is said, has
this same defect. We may compare the opinion that the older actors
entertained of their successors. Mynniscus used to call Callippides
'ape' on account of the extravagance of his action, and the same view
was held of Pindarus. Tragic art, then, as a whole, stands to Epic in
the same relation as the younger to the elder actors. So we are told
that Epic poetry is addressed to a cultivated audience, who do not need
gesture; Tragedy, to an inferior public. Being then unrefined, it is
evidently the lower of the two.

Now, in the first place, this censure attaches not to the poetic but to
the histrionic art; for gesticulation may be equally overdone in
epic recitation, as by Sosi-stratus, or in lyrical competition, as by
Mnasitheus the Opuntian. Next, all action is not to be condemned any
more than all dancing--but only that of bad performers. Such was the
fault found in Callippides, as also in others of our own day, who are
censured for representing degraded women. Again, Tragedy like Epic
poetry produces its effect even without action; it reveals its power
by mere reading. If, then, in all other respects it is superior, this
fault, we say, is not inherent in it.

And superior it is, because it has all the epic elements--it may even
use the epic metre--with the music and spectacular effects as important
accessories; and these produce the most vivid of pleasures. Further,
it has vividness of impression in reading as well as in representation.
Moreover, the art attains its end within narrower limits; for the
concentrated effect is more pleasurable than one which is spread over a
long time and so diluted. What, for example, would be the effect of the
Oedipus of Sophocles, if it were cast into a form as long as the Iliad?
Once more, the Epic imitation has less unity; as is shown by this, that
any Epic poem will furnish subjects for several tragedies. Thus if
the story adopted by the poet has a strict unity, it must either be
concisely told and appear truncated; or, if it conform to the Epic canon
of length, it must seem weak and watery. <Such length implies some loss
of unity,> if, I mean, the poem is constructed out of several actions,
like the Iliad and the Odyssey, which have many such parts, each with a
certain magnitude of its own. Yet these poems are as perfect as possible
in structure; each is, in the highest degree attainable, an imitation of
a single action.

If, then, Tragedy is superior to Epic poetry in all these respects, and,
moreover, fulfils its specific function better as an art for each art
ought to produce, not any chance pleasure, but the pleasure proper to
it, as already stated it plainly follows that Tragedy is the higher art,
as attaining its end more perfectly.

Thus much may suffice concerning Tragic and Epic poetry in general;
their several kinds and parts, with the number of each and their
differences; the causes that make a poem good or bad; the objections of
the critics and the answers to these objections.
